Class 


Book 


Copyright  N 


o   W 


COPYRIGHT  DEPOSIT. 


Jack's  Manual 


ON 


THE  VINTAGE   AND   PRODUCTION,   CARE 

AND    HANDLING    OF    WINES, 

LIQUORS,    ETC. 

A   HANDBOOK  OF   INFORMATION 
FOR    HOME,    CLUB,    OR    HOTEL 


RECIPES   FOR 

FANCY  MIXED  DRINKS 

AND 

WHEN  AND   HOW  TO  SERVE 
|  j& 

COPYRIGHTED    1910 
BY 

J.  A.  GROHUSKO 
10  Broadway,  New  York 


\ 


Press    of 

McCLUNN    &    CO.. 

10-12    Broadway, 

New    York. 


©GI.A25908 


INDEX 


A 

Page 

v       Alcohol    17 

■  Ales    16 

Absinthe    24 

Absinthe   Cocktail 24 

Absinthe    Dripped 24 

Absinthe    Frappe 24 

Auditorium    Cooler 26 

Ale    Sangaree .' 24 

Alexander    Cocktail 24 

Amer.   Picon  Highball . 24 

Anderson     Cocktail 25 

Angostura    Fizz 25 

Angostura  Ginger  Ale 25 

Angostura   Grape   Fruit 25 

An   Oxford  University   Nightcap.  23 

A   Clover  Leaf 23 

An   Ale   Cup 23 

Appetizers    85 

Appetizing    Sandwiches 86 

Apollinaris    Lemonade 25 

Apple  Jack  Cocktail 25 

Apple   Tack   Sour 25 

Apple  Toddy 25 

Ardsley    Cooler 26 

Arf  and   Arf 26 

A   Soul  Kiss 23 

Astringent    26 

Ale  Benie   Cocktail 24 

Appendix    22 

B 

Bailor    Cocktail 26 

Baltimore   Egg  Nogg 27 

Bambo    Cocktail 27 

Baracca's    Cocktail 27 

Barry    Cocktail 27 

B.eals    Cocktail 27 

Beef   Tea 27 

Bicarbonate    of    Soda 27 

Bijou    Cocktail 28 

Bishop     28 

Black    Hawk    Cocktail 28 

Black    Stripe 29 

Black   Thorn    Cocktail 28 

Blue   Blazer 29 

Bonnett    Cocktail 29 

Bornn's    Cocktail 29 

Bottle    of    Cocktail 29 

Bowl  of  Egg  Nogg 3) 

Brandy  burned  with  peach 30 

Brandy  and  Ginger  Ale 32 

Brandy   and   .Soda 32 

Brandy  and  Champrelle 30 

Brandy    Cocktail 30 

Brandy   Crusta 30 

Brandy    Daisy 30 

Brandy    Fix 32 


Page 

Brandy     Fizz 32 

Brandy    Flip 32 

Brandy    Float 32 

Brandy  High  Ball 32 

Brandy   Julep 33 

Brandy    Punch 33 

Brandy   Rickey 33 

Brandy    Sangaree 33 

Brandy   Scaffa 33 

Brandy   Smash 33 

Brandy    Sour 34 

Brandy   Toddy 34 

Bronx    Cocktail 34 

Bronx   Terrace 31 

Brooklvn    Cocktail 31 

Brut   Cocktail  f. 31 

Bvrrh    Cocktail 31 

Byrrh   Wine   Rickey 31 

Byrrh  Wine   Daisy 31 

Butcher    Cocktail 31 

B.    B.    Highball 27 

Bacardi     Cocktail 26 

Boston    Cooler 29 

Bogarz    Cocktail 29 

Bismarck   Cocktail 28 

Billin    Cocktail 28 

Bachelor's  Rose 26 

Bottling  _ 6 

Burgundies,   Red   and   White....  9 

Bitter-Sweet   Wines 12 

Bitters 13 

Brandies   or   Cognac 14 

Beers    16 

Binning     17 

C 

Cellar    [Management 17 

Calisaya     Cocktail 34 

California    Sherry    Cobbler 34 

Campill    Cocktail 34 

Canadian    Fizz 36 

Catawba   Cobbler 35 

Champagne,    Domestic    American  6 

Champagne    Cobbler 86 

Champagne    Cocktail 87 

Champagne    Julep 87 

Champagne    Punch 36 

Champagne    Sour 36 

Champagne    Velvet 36 

Chocolate    Cocktail 39 

Chocolate   Punch 37 

Christie   Cocktail 37 

Cincinnati    Cocktail 37 

Claret    18 

Claret   Cobbler 37 

Clarets    19 

Claret    Lemonade 37 

Claret    Punch 38 

Cliftin    Cocktail 39 


Page 

Cheese     Straws ^ 

Coffee    Cocktail 37 

Corking    1 1 

Coffee   Kirsch 37 

Columbus    Cocktail 38 

Coney    Cocktail 3S 

Cocktail   a  la  Furey 36 

Consolidated     Cocktail 38 

Creme  de  Menthe  on   Ice 38 

Cris    Cocktail 38 

Curacoa    Punch 35 

Cushman    Cocktail 3  5 

Creme  de  Menthe  High  Ball 35 

Champagne     Frappe 36 

Champagne    Cup 38 

Claret    Cup 39 

Cider    Cup 36 

Clarendon    Cocktail 35 

Cleaves    Delight 35 

Clover   Leaf   Cocktail.*. 39 

Cognac  a  la  Rouss 39 

Cognac     14 

Cook's    Cocktail 39 

Cotton    Cocktail 35 

Cuvee    (The) 6 

D 

Decanting    17 

Dean    Cocktail 40 

Dogs    Days 41 

Donnelly's    41 

Dorr    Cocktail 40 

Dubonnet    Cocktail 40 

Dry   Martini    Cocktail 40 

Dunham   Cooler 40 

Domestic   or  Amer.    Champagne.  6 

Daniel   Webster   Punch 40 

Devil's    Cocktail 40 

Disgorgement,    The 11 

E 

Edner     Cocktail 41 

Egg   Lemonade 41 

Egg  Milk  Punch 

Egg  Nogg   Plain 41 

Egg   Phosphate 41 

Egg     Sour 42 

Elks'    Delight 42 

Evans    Cocktail 42 

Evans   Shandy   Gaff 42 

Evans    Cooler 41 

F 

French    Wines 11 

Fairbanks    Cocktail 43 

Fancy  Brandy..  Gin  and  Whiskey 

Cocktails    43 

Fancy   Whiskey   Smash 43 

Farmer's    Cocktail 42 

Fine    Lemonade,    for' parties.  ..  .    42 

Fishhouse    Punch 43 

Frank  Hill   Cocktail 43 

Freeman's     Bliss 43 

French  Flag    43 

Fedora 87 

Fowler    Cocktail 87 

Forming  the    Sparkle 10 


G 

Page 

Gin     16 

Gin    and    Calamus 44 

Gin    and    Milk 4-1 

Gin  and   Molasses 44 

Gin   and  Tansy 44 

Gin    Cocktail 46 

Gin    Crusta 46 

Gin    Daisy 46 

Gin    Fix 46 

Gin    Fizz 47 

Gin    Highball 47 

Gin   Julep 47 

Gin     Punch 46 

Gin   Rickey 47 

Gin     Sangaree 44 

Gin   Smash 44 

Gin    Sour 44 

Gin    Toddy 45 

Glasgow    Flip 45 

Golden    Fizz 45 

Graham   Cocktail 45 

Guggenheimer      Cocktail 45 

Gum    Syrup 45 

German    Wines 12 

Grenedine    High   Ball 46 

Gin    Bump 45 

H 

Hamerslev    47 

Hocks    20 

Half   and   Half 47 

Hock     Cobbler 47 

Halstein     Cocktail 47 

Honolulu    Cocktail 48 

Horse's   Neck 48 

Hot  Brandy  Sling 48 

Hot  Gin   Sling 49 

Plot  Irish  Punch 49 

Hot    Lemonade 49 

1 1  ot   Milk  Punch 49 

Hot    Rum 49 

Hot   Scotch 48 

Hot   Scotch   Toddy 18 

Hot    Scotch    Whiskey   Sling 48 

Hot   Spiced   Rum 48 

Hunter   Cocktail 49 

Hot   Cobbler 50 

Hot  Egg  Nogg 50 

Hamilton     Cocktail 49 

Hudson    Cocktail 50 

How  to   Serve   Burgundies 10 

I 

Improved   Manhattan    Cocktail...  5) 

Improved    Martini    Cocktail 50 

Irving    Cocktail 50 

Isabelle    Cocktail 51 

Italian     Cocktail 51 

Italian    Wine    Lemonade 51 

Italian    Wine 11 

Illinois    Thunderbolt 51 

Imperial   Egg   Nogg 51 

J 

Tack    Rose 51 

Tack  Zeller  Cocktail 51 

Tamaica    Rum    Sour 53 


Page 

Japanese    Cocktail 53 

jenks    Cocktail 53 

Jersey  Lily  Pousse   Cafe 52 

Jersey    Sunset 52 

Jersey    Sour 53 

Jersey     Cocktail 53 

John    Collins 53 

judge    Smith    Cocktail 53 

June    Daisy 52 

Tune    Rose 52 

Junkins    Cocktail 52 

K 

Kischwasser     Punch 54 

Knickebein     54 

Knickerbocker     54 

L 

Liqueurs    13 

Lemonade     54 

Leonora     Cocktail 54 

Liberal     Cocktail 55 

Little    Maxine 54 

Loewi     Cocktail 55 

Long  Tree   Cocktail 55 

Lawrence    55 

Liqueuring    11 

M 

Magnus    87 

Maiden's  Dream 87 

Mamie    Taylor 87 

Manhattan    Cocktail 55 

Marguerite     Cocktail 56 

Martini    Cocktail 56 

May   Wine   Punch 57 

Medford   Rum  Punch 56 

A I  edford  Rum  Smash 57 

Medford    Rum    Sour 57 

Merry   Widow   Cocktail 57 

Metropolitan    Cocktail 57 

Milk     Punch. 58 

Milk    Shake 58 

Milk  and  Seltzer 58 

Mint    Julep 58 

Mississippi    Punch 58 

Montana    Club    Cocktail 59 

Montgomery      58 

Morning    Cocktail 59 

Morning   Glory    Fizz 59 

Mulled    Ale 55 

Mulled  Ale  or  a  Burton  on  Trent  55 

Mulled    Claret 59 

Murphy   Cocktail .  56 

Mise    sur    Pointe 10 

Millionaire's     Cocktail 59 

Moselle   Cup 56 

Moselle  Wine '  20 

N 

National    Guard    Punch 60 

Nicholas    Cocktail 60 

New    Orleans    Fizz 60 

North    Pole    Cocktail 59 


O 

Page 

Old   Delaware   Fishing   Punch...  61 

Old   Fashion    Cocktails 61 

Olivette     Cocktail 61 

Orchard    Punch 62 

Orgeat     62 

Oyster    Bay    Cocktail 62 

Orangeade    62 

Oyster   Cocktail 61 

One  Yard  of  Flannel  or  Ale  Flips  60 

Old  Oxford  College   Mulled  Ale.  60 

Orange     Cocktail 61 


P 

Port    Wine 18 

Palmetto   Cocktail 62 

Parisian    62 

Parisian  Pousse  Cafe 62 

Parson's     Cocktail 63 

Pat's   Cocktail 64 

Peach  and  Honey 63 

Perfect     Cocktail 63 

Pheasant    Cocktail 63 

Picon    Cocktail 63 

Plain     Lemonade 64 

Port   Wine   Cobbler 65 

Port  Wine  Flip 65 

Port  Wine  Punch 65 

Port  Wine   Sangaree 64 

Porter    Cocktail 64 

Pousse    Cafe 64 

Pousse   F Amour 65 

Preparing  Rock  and   Rye 64 

Punch  a  la  Romaine.  .  .' 63 

Philadelphia    Bronx 65 

Postmaster    65 

Patrick   Cocktail 66 

Palmar   Cocktail 65 

Pony    of    Brandy 63 

Production    of    Champagne 5 

Porter 16 


Highball 66 


R 

Randolph     66 

Red   Lion    Cocktail 66 

Regent    Punch 66 

Renaud's   Pousse   Cafe 67 

Rhine    Wine    and    Seltzer 67 

Rhine   Wine    Cobbler 67 

Richmond     Cocktail 67 

Robert     Burns 68 

Robinson    Cocktail 68 

Rob    Roy 68 

Roman     Punch 68 

Royal    Fizz 69 

Royal    Punch 69 

Rum     16 

Rum    Daisy 69 

Rum     Flip 69 


Page 

Rum   Flip    (Western    Style) 69 

Rye    Highball 70 

Rye  Whiskey   Rickey 70 

Remsen     Cooler 67 

Rhine  Wine  Cup 67 

Raphael    Cocktail 66 

Raymond     Cocktail 66 

Rocky    Mountain     Cooler 68 

Rossington    Cocktail 68 

Ruby    Cocktail 69 

S 

Sam     Ward 70 

Saratoga    Cocktail 70 

Sauterne     Cobbler 70 

Scheuer    Cocktail 74 

Scotch     Highball 75 

Scotch    Whiskey    Rickey. 75 

Seltzer   Lemonade 75 

Shandy    Gaff 75 

Sherry    and    Angostura 75 

Sherry    and    Bitters 71 

Sherry    and    Egg 71 

Sherry    Cobbler 71 

Sherry    Cocktail 71 

Sherry     20 

Sherry     Flip 71 

Sherry  Wine  Punch 71 

Sherry   Wine    Sangaree 71 

Silver   Cocktail 72 

Silver    Fizz 72 

Sloe   Gin  Cocktail 72 

Sloe    Gin    Highball 72 

Sloe   Gin   Rickey 72 

Soda     Cocktail 72 

Soda     Lemonade 73 

Soda    Negus 73 

St.    Charles    Punch 73 

Sankey    Punch 70 

St.    Croix   Crusta 73 

St.     Croix    Fizz 73 

Stout     16 

Sauternes    7-8 

Serving     6 

Sherry     20 

Sweet-Bitter    Wines 12 

Sloe    Gin    Fizz 72 

Sloe    Gin    Bump 76 

Sauterne      Cup 76 

Silverman     70 

Shonnard     Cocktail 75 

Stone    Fence 75 

Stone   Wall 75 

Stony     Cocktail 76 

Swiss    Ess 76 

Sabbath    Morning    Calm 70 

Schulke     Cocktail 74 

Stanton      Cocktail 74 

Star    Cocktail 74 

Starboard     Light 74 

Santa   Croix   Rum   Punch 74 

Santa    Croix    Sour 74 


T 

Page 

Tom    Collins    Gin 77 

Tom    Collins    Brandy 77 

Tom    Collins   Whiskey 77 

Tom  Collins  Rum 77 

Tom   and    Jerry 77 

Trilby    Cocktail 77 

Trowbridge     Cocktail 7S 

Turf    Cocktail 78 

Turkish     Sherbet 78 

Tuxedo    Cocktail 78 

Terminal    Cooler 76 

Tip    Top     Punch 76 

Tucker     Cocktail 79 

Treasurer    Cocktail 77 

V 

Vanilla    Punch 79 

Van  Zandt   Cocktail 79 

Vermouth    Cocktail 79 

Vermouth    Frappe 79 

Vichy     80 

Virgin    Cocktail 80 

Velvet    Champagne 79 

Van  Lee   Cocktail 79 

Vermouth     Plighball 80 

Vermouth     14 

W 

Whiskey      14-15 

Whiskey     Cobbler 80 

Whiskey    Cocktail 80 

Whiskey     Crusta 8) 

Whiskey    Daisy 80 

Whiskey     Fix 80 

Whiskey     Fizz 81 

Whiskey   Flip 81 

Whiskey     Float 81 

Whiskey  Julep 81 

Whiskey   Punch 81 

Whiskey    Rickev 81 

Whiskey   Sling.". 81 

Whiskey     Smash 82 

Whiskey     Sour 82 

Whiskey     Toddy 82 

White    Horse 82 

White    Lion 82 

White     Plush 83 

White     Rat 83 

Widow's     Dream 83 

Widow's     Kiss 83 

Wines   of   Germany 12 

Wines    of    Italy 11 

Washington    Cocktail 83 

When   and   how   to    serve   bever- 
ages      21 

Williams    Cocktail 83 

Z 

Zabriskie     Cocktail 84 

Za    Za    Cocktail 84 

Zazarack     Cocktail 84 


INTRODUCTORY. 

The  author,  in  presenting  this  volume  to  the  public,  begs 
to  state  that  his  intention  in  compiling  it  is  not  to  have  it 
recorded  as  one  of  the  literary  marvels  of  the  day,  but  to  give 
to  the  "prince  of  good  fellows"  a  guide  of  value  for  his  home, 
club,  hotel  or  cafe. 

As  previously  stated  in  his  first  issue,  it  is  only  practical 
experience,  through  long  association  with  the  leading  Amer- 
ican hotels  and  clubs,  which  prompts  him  to  publish  this 
volume  (his  second  attempt),  the  most  complete  of  its  kind 
ever  issued. 

In  the  various  recipes,  reference  is  made  only  to  wines 
and  ingredients   of   the  highest  character. 

In  the  advertising  section  contained  at  the  end  of  this 
book,  the  reader  will  find  only  such  products  as  have  been 
preferred  by  the  author;  and  as  their  use  has  proven 
satisfactory  and  pleased  many  thousand  guests,  he  would 
suggest   their   preference    in   your   mixing. 

That  the  reader  may  be  familiar  with  the  various  sizes 
and  the  terms  used  in  this  publication,  the  following  table 
will  prove  of  value,  but  only  applies  to  liquor,  /.  e.,  whiskey, 
gin,    etc.,    other    ingredients    additional: 

1   Jigger    =     y2   whiskey   glass. 
100%  1/ 


to  =     y2 

=    Ya 


50% 

25%  =    y8 

half    whiskey    glass    being    regarded    as    a    full    portion    for 
one    person. 

If  you,  my  friend,  at  any  time  wish  advice  relating  to 
the  subject  of  mixed  drinks  or  beverages,  and  will  correspond 
with  the  author,  your  communication  will  receive  prompt 
and   careful   attention. 

In  closing,  one  request  is  made  of  the  reader:  If  through 
the  pages  of  this  work  you  find  its  contents  of  value, 
suggest  it  to  your  friends,  that  we  all  may  drink  each  other's 
health. 

THE  AUTHOR. 


THE    AUTHOR. 


PRODUCTION     OF    CHAMPAGNE. 

Champagne  is  produced  in  the  Department  of  Marne., 
where  grapes  were  cultivated  as  far  back  as  the  sixth  cen- 
tury. In  the  last  will  and  testament  of  Remy,  Archbishop 
of  Reims,  dated  A.  D.  530,  he  bequeaths  to  the  clergy  of 
his  diocese,  vineyards  situated  in  the  neighborhood  of  that 
city.  The  growth  of  the  Champagne  district  has  continu- 
ally increased  since  the  tenth  century,  and  viticulture  has 
become  a  very  important  industry.  The  real  development 
of  champagne  dates  from  the  eighteenth  century,  when  Dom 
Perignon,  a  monk  of  the  Abbey  of  Hautvillers,  near  Eper- 
nay,  discovered  the  method  of  making  sparkling  cham- 
pagne. The  Champagne  district  seems  to  have  a  special 
influence  over  the  fruit  grown  upon  it,  which  possesses  a 
perfume  and  other  qualities  not  found  in  grapes  grown  any- 
where else.  The  soil  is  composed  of  chalk  with  a  light 
covering  of  earth,  which  gives  the  grapes  their  distinctive 
qualities,  producing  a  sparkling  wine  which  cannot  be 
equalled.  Many  people  think  that  campagne  is  made  from 
a  white  grape,  but  not  more  than  one  quarter  of  the  grapes 
grown  in  the  Champagne  vineyards  are  white,  the  rest  being 
black.  Great  precaution  is  taken  not  to  crush  the  grapes 
when  gathering,  the  bunches  being  detached  from  the  vine 
one  by  one,  and  carefully  sorted  according  to  their  ripeness, 
and  in  some  locations  every  individual  grape  is  examined. 
The  grapes  are  pressed  daily  in  a  large  press,  worked  by 
hand,  and  the  must  (juice)  is  separated  at  once  from  the 
stalk  and  skin,  which  contains  the  coloring  matter.  This 
liquid  is  almost  colorless,  and  after  fermentation  becomes 
still  lighter  in  color.  The  juice  obtained  from  the  press  by 
three  consecutive  pressings,  gives  the  cuvee,  and  it  is  this 
liquid  which  has  the  necessary  qualities  to  make  a  fine 
wine.  The  wines  obtained  by  subsequent  pressure  are 
called  vins  de  suite,  and  are  inferior  in  quality,  and  cannot 
be   used   for   choice    champagne. 

As  the  must  runs  out  of  the  press,  it  is  put  into  vats, 
where  it  is  left  to  settle  for  twelve  hours  to  allow  impurities 
to  settle  at  the  bottom.  It  is  then  drawn  off  into  casks, 
the  cleanliness  of  which  is  scrupulously  looked  after.  A 
few  days  later  fermentation  commences  and  changes  the 
sweet  liquid  into  an  alcoholic  one,  which  is  wine.  When 
cold  weather  sets  in.  the  wine  becomes  clear  and  is  drawn 
off,    the    lees    remaining    in   the    cask. 

The  wine-producing  district  of  Champagne  may  be 
divided  into  three  regions.  First,  the  mountain  country  of 
Reims,  where  the  grapes  possess   the   distinctive   qualities   of 


vinosity  and  freshness;  second,  the  Avize  district,  notable 
for  wines  made  from  white  grapes,  "which  are  of  great  del- 
icacy; and  third,  the  Valley  of  the  Marne,  where  the  wines 
are  characterized  by  an  excellent  bouquet.  Wines  made 
solely  from  grapes  of  any  one  district  would  be  found  dis- 
appointing. _  One  must  unite  the  freshness  and  strength  of 
Verzenay  with  the  mellowness  of  Bouzy,  the  softness  of 
Cramant,  and  the  bouquet  of  Ay,  in  order  to  blend  into  a 
champagne  all  the  delightful  qualities  which  a  connoisseur 
expects  to  find.  During  January  and  February  the  wine- 
maker  mixes  in  immense  casks  the  wines  from  different 
vineyards.  Wines  want  character,  bouquet,  vinosity  and 
delicacy,  and  these  qualities  can  only  be  secured  by  the 
mixture  of  wines  possessing  these  elements  individually. 
To  make  a  fine  champagne  one  must  know  thoroughly  the 
characteristics  of  «the  wine  of  each  vineyard,  and  this  re- 
quires a  keen  sense  of  smell  and  taste,  and  great  skill  and 
experience. 

The    Cuvee. 

Mixing  the  wines,  or  as  it  is  called,  "Making  the  Cuvee," 
is  done  in  the  early  spring  by  carefully  blending  wines  from 
the  different  districts  in  large  vats  or  casks,  and  it  is  then 
ready  to  be  put  into  bottle. 

Bottling. 

By  the  aid  of  mechanical  apparatus  the  wine,  to  which 
is  added  a  certain  quantity  of  cane  sugar,  is  put  into  new 
and  carefully  rinsed  out  bottles;  these  are  corked  and  the 
cork  held  in  by  means  of  an  iron  clasp.  The  bottles  are 
immediately  stored  on  their  sides  in  immense  cellars,  hewn 
from  solid  chalk. 

Domestic     or    American     Champagne. 

Some  good  wines  are  made  in  the  United  States  from 
grapes,  some  of  which  were  originally  transplanted  from 
France,  and  in  many  instances  they  have  made  remarkable 
progress  in  their  similarity  to  the   imported. 

Serving. 

The  process  of  uncorking  this  wine  is  often  grossly  mis- 
managed. The  cork  should  be  slowly  and  noiselessly  ex- 
tracted after,  first  the  wire,  and  then  the  string,  are  entirely 
removed.  The  glass  must  be  near  at  hand  so  that  no  wine 
may  be  lost.  Care  should  be  taken  that  the  wine  flows 
out  quietly,  and  if  gently  poured  on  the  side  of  the  wine 
glass  the  ebullition  of  the  wine  will  be  checked  and  the 
goblet  filled  without  spilling.  Do  not  fill  the  glass  of  any 
wine  to  the  brim,  but  leave  a  quarter  of  an  inch  or  more 
free.      Rich   champagne   only   requires   to  be  stood  in  ice  up 


to  the  shoulder  of  the  bottle  for  not  longer  than  twenty 
minutes,  even  in  the  hottest  weather.  It  is  important  to 
remember  that  too  much  icing  destroys  body  and  vinosity. 
Served  with  ice  puddings  a  rich  champagne  is  delicious,  or 
even  after  soup,  but  it  would  be  considered  cruel  to  provide 
nothing  but  champagne  during  the  whole  of  a  dinner.  Should 
champagne  be  required  between  luncheon  and  dinner,  it  is 
well  to  serve  a  biscuit  with  it. 


SAUTERNES. 
Un    Rayon    de    Soleil    Concentre    Dans    un    Verre    (Biarnez). 

The  region  which  produces  the  celebrated  white  wines 
universally  known  under  the  name  of  sauternes  is  situated 
on  the  left  bank  of  the  Garonne,  about  35  kilometers  south 
of  Bordeaux,  and  includes  the  communes  or  parishes  of 
Barsac,  Bommes,  Fargues,  Sauternes  and  Preignac,  and  a 
part  of  Saint-Pierre  de   Mons. 

The  country  is  hilly,  admirably  exposed  to  the  rays  of 
the  sun,  which  explains,  to  a  great  extent,  the  degree  of 
maturity  the  grapes  attain. 

The  soil  is  more  or  less  sandy,  argillo-sillico-calcareous 
in  some  parts,  argillo  calcareous  (as  at  Barsac)  or  entirely 
argillaceous   in   others. 

There  is  no  doubt  that  to  this  particularly  favorable 
soil  is  due  in  a  great  measure  the  superiority  of  the  Sauternes 
wines,  which  it  is  impossible  to  equal  anywhere  else,  how- 
ever careful  the  vinification  may  be.  But  it  is  only  just  to 
add  that  the  selection  of  the  vine  plants,  the  extraordinary 
care  bestowed  on  the  culture  of  the  vineyards,  the  special 
and  expensive  vinification,  contribute  to  ensure  perfection 
in  bouquet,  color,  and  finesse  in  a  wine  to  which  no  other 
can  be  compared,  for  the  simple  reason  that,  of  its  kind, 
there    exists   nothing  like   it. 

The  appearance  of  the  vineyards  in  this  region  differs 
from  that  of  the  Medoc,  inasmuch  as  the  vines  are  high; 
the  surrounding  country  in  which  culture  is  more  varied,  is 
hilly  and  picturesque,  the  views  from  some  of  the  heights, 
that,  amongst  others,  on  which  Chateau  Yquem  is  situated 
extending   miles    over   fertile   scenery. 

It  would  take  too  much  space  to  describe  minutely  the 
labor  involved  in  cultivating  these  vineyards;  each  season, 
or,  more  exactly,  each  day,  brings  its  task,  and  nothing 
must  be  neglected,  however  futile  this  may  appear  to  the 
uninitiated. 

As  before  mentioned,  the  grapes  are  gathered  and  pressed 
in  a   manner  peculiar  to  the   district. 

The  gathering  takes  place  later  than  in  the  Medoc  and 
lasts    much    longer,    commencing    at    the    end    of   September, 


and  terminating  in  the  first  half  of  November.  The  grapes 
are  allowed  to  attain  the  extreme  ^degree  of  ripeness,  and, 
after  taking  a  deep  golden  color,  they  finally,  under  the  influ- 
ence of  the  mycoderma  "Botrytis  Cinerea,"  become  over-ripe, 
a  state  absolutely  necessary  to  ensure  the  quality  of  the 
future  wine.  The  berry  subsequently  becomes  browned  and 
roasted,  the  skin  gets  thin  and  cracks,  and  a  sugary  juice 
oozes  from  it.  Little  by  little,  each  berry  advances  to  this 
state  until  the  whole  bunch  forms,  so  to  speak,  but  one  mass 
of  juicy  fruit.  It  may  easily  be  imagined  how  fragile  the 
grapes  are  when  they  get  to  this  degree  of  maturity,  and 
how,  whilst  they  gain  if  the  weather  remains  line,  they  are 
likely  to  suffer  if  it  becomes  rainy. 

The  gathering  is  effected  in  small  quantities  at  a  time, 
and  only  as  each  bunch  of  grapes  attains  the  advanced  state 
described  above,  f  Sometimes,  and  especially  in  the  first 
growths,  each  berry  is  gathered  separately  and  more  or 
less  quickly,  according  to  the  weather.  When  rainy,  the 
operations  are  suspended  and  resumed  when  it  becomes  dry 
again. 

Jt  is  easy  to  see  that  quantity  here  is  sacrificed  to  quality, 
and  that  the  expenses  of  wine  making,  under  such  circum- 
stances, must  necessarily  be  high.  It  often  requires  as  many 
as  six  successive  pickings  to  gather  one  bunch.  The  cost 
of  cultivating  vineyards  in  the  Sauternes  district  is  esti- 
mated to  range  from  1000  to  1200  francs  per  hectare,  in- 
clusive of  grape-picking  and  purchase  of  casks;  the  yield 
per  hectare  may  be  roughly  estimated  at  from  4  to  7  hogs- 
heads, according  to  the  vintage.  Vintaged  by  ordinary 
methods,    the    wines    would    yield    at    least    one-third    more. 

In  the  superior  growths,  there  are  three  selections  or 
"tries,"  the  first,  comprising  the  berries  which  have  dried 
somewhat  after  becoming  over-ripe,  yields  what  is  known  as 
"vin    de    tete." 

The  second  selection  comprises  the  berries  in  a  some- 
what less  advanced  state  and  yields  a  larger  quantity;  the 
third  includes  the  remainder  of  the  grapes,  which,  although 
ripe,  have  not  attained  the  same  degree  of  maturity  as  the 
others;  the  wine  pressed  from  it  is  called  "vin  de  queue"  and 
is   relatively  unimportant   in   quantity. 

The  grapes  are  pressed  rapidly,  so  as  to  prevent  the 
wine  from  taking  too  deep  a  color  from  the  skin.  The  must 
which  flows  from  the  press  is  at  once  put  into  casks,  where 
the  fermentation  takes  place  almost  immediately  and  lasts 
several  weeks,  the  duration  depending  on  the  style  of  the 
wine  and  on  the  temperature. 

The  quality  is  approximately  judged  by  the  musts,  but 
it  is  only  after  the  first  racking,  generally  when  the  winter 
is  over,  that  a  definite  opinion  can  be  formed.  Four  rackings 
a  year  are  necessary,  sometimes  five  for  wines  of  the  first 
picking;  a  daily  inspection,  tasting  and  filling  of  the  casks,  are 
requisite  to  ensure  proper  treatment. 

8 


"*,, 


^%£* 


The  classed  growths  are  sold  under  their  name,  Chateau 
Yquem  being  the  first  and  probably  the  best  known.  But 
simply  as  sauternes,  barsac,  bommes,  preignac,  etc.,  wines  of 
the  highest  grade  are  sold  and  fetch  high  prices,  the  greatest 
care  being  bestowed  on  the  small  vineyards  as  on  the  large 
ones. 

Sauternes — of  succeeded  vintages — are  delicate  in  flavor, 
of  a  pale  golden  color,  mellow,  rich,  bordering  on  sweetness, 
and  have  a  line,  agreeable  bouquet;  they  are  hygienic^  not 
heady,  and  merit  the  description  of  perfection  in  white  wines. 

Dr.  Mauriac,  of  Bordeaux,  says  in  one  of  his  works:  "The 
great  Sauternes  white  wines,  which  are  of  a  relatively  high 
alcoholic  strength,  are  both  tonic  and  stimulating;  consumed 
moderately,  they  are  invaluable  to  convalescents  after  a 
severe  illness  or  when  it  is  neces-sary  to  revive  an  organism 
extenuated  by  high  fever,  hemorrhage,  or  long  fatigue. 

"They  are  perfect  as  dessert  wines  and  one  or  two  glasses 
at  the  end  of  a  meal  facilitate  digestion  and  provoke  gaiety." 

BURGUNDIES— RED     AND     WHITE. 

The  wines  produced  in  the  Province  of  Burgundy,  situ- 
ated in  eastern  France,  viz.,  in  the  Cote  d'Or,  between  Macon, 
Baune  and  Dijon,  rank  among  the  best  burgundies.  They 
contain  more  tartrates  and  tannin  than  clarets,  and  are  al- 
together heavier  in   body  and   aroma. 


9 


The  best  known  cheaper  qualities  are  Macon,  Baune  and 
Beaujolais,  and  their  names  indicate  generally  the  district 
of  their  growth.  The  better  wines  are  Romanee,  Canti, 
Pommard,  Chambertin,  Nuits  and  Clos  De  Vougot,  and  the 
best  known  white  wines  are  the   Chablis. 

The  red  burgundies  are  recommended  as  blood-making 
wines,  especially  in  cases   of  general  or  local  anaemia. 

How   to   Serve    Burgundy    Wines. 

Red  burgundies  should  be  served  just  as  clarets,  at  the 
dining-room  temperature,  having  been  brought  from  the 
cellar  several  hours  before  the  meal,  after  having  decanted 
them  off  their  sediment,  or  by  using  special  baskets  in  which 
the  bottles  are  laid  just  as  they  lay  in  the  bin. 

Burgundy  wines  in  bottle  form  a  sediment,  owing  to 
maturing,  which  is  more  or  less  abundant,  according  to  the 
growths  and  ages.  This  sediment  does  not  impair  the  quality 
of  the  wine,  provided  the  bottle  is  uncorked  carefully  and 
not  shaken  so  as  to  disturb  the  sediment.  The  cork  having 
been  drawn,  the  wine  should  be  carefully  decanted  while 
holding  the  bottle  up  against  the  light  in  the  same  position 
as  it  was  when  stored  in  the  cellar.  As  soon  as  the  sediment 
is  nearing  the  neck  of  the  bottle  the  decanting  must  be 
stopped,  for  the  mixing  of  the  sediment  with  the  wine  will 
deprive  the  latter  of  its  bouquet  and  render  it  bitter.  Bottles 
should  never  be  left  uncorked,  for  the  better  the  quality  of 
the  wine  the  more  apt  it  is  to  become  flat.  White  wines 
should  be  left  in  the  cellar  until  needed.  Sparkling  wines 
should  be  iced. 

Forming    the    Sparkle. 

The  ferments  which  existed  at  the  time  of  the  vintage  and 
had  become  dormant  during  the  winter,  revive  with  the  first 
warmth  of  spring,  and  commence  to  act  afresh.  They  de- 
compose the  natural  sugar  still  remaining  from  the  vintage 
and  transform  it,  as  also  the  cane  sugar  added  at  the  time 
of  bottling,  into  a  supplementary  amount  of  alcohol  and 
carbonic  acid  gas;  but  this  time  the  gas  cannot  escape  be- 
cause the  bottle  is  hermetically  sealed;  instead,  it  mixes  thor- 
oughly with  the  wine,  producing  that  elegant  sparkle  so  well 
known.  This  fermentation  in  the  corked  bottles  generates  a 
deposit  which  settles  on  the  lower  side  of  the  bottle  and 
must  be  got  rid  of.  This  is  effected  by  two  operations. 
These    are    the    "mise    sur   pointe"    and    the    "disgorgement." 

The    Mise    Sur    Pointe. 

The  bottles  are  placed  head  downward  through  an  in- 
clined plank  pierced  with  holes  at  an  angle  of  70  degrees. 
Every  day  for  at-  least  three  months  a  cellerman,  specially 
trained  for  this  kind  of  work,  shakes  the  bottles  lightly 
against  the  plank  with  a  wrist  movement  quick  and  sharp. 
The  deposit   slowly  descends  and  collects  on  the  cork. 


The    Disgorgement. 

The  deposit,  having  settled  on  the  cork,  is  now  ready  to 
be  extracted.  To  do  this  the  bottle  is  first  placed  head 
downward,  to  a  depth  of  three  inches,  in  a  refrigerating  bath 
Under  the  action  of  the  cold,  the  deposit  congeals  in  the 
neck  of  the  bottle.  The  cellerman  then  takes  the  bottle  out 
of  the  bath,  holds  it  upright,  undoes  the  clasp  and  eases  the 
cork,  which  the  pressure  of  the  carbonic  gas  inside  eventu- 
ally forces  out  with  a  loud  report,  together  with  the  deposit. 
The   wine    is   then   absolutely   clear. 

The    Liquering. 

After  disgorging,  the  wine  has  not  the  least  taste  of 
sugar,  the  sugar  added  at  bottling  having  been  completely 
transformed  into  alcohol  and  carbonic  acid.  Whilst  in  this 
state  the  wine  is  known  as  "brut."  To  regulate  it  to  the 
client's  taste,  which  varies  in  different  countries,  a  certain 
quantity  of  liqueur,  composed  of  sugar  candy  and  wine  from 
the  finest  Champagne  vineyards,  is  added  immediately  after 
the  disgorging. 

The    Corking. 

For  corking,  the  best  Spanish  corks  are  used  and  are 
held  in  by  either  string  and  wire  or  wire  muzzle,  according 
to  the  custom  of  each  house.  Finally  the  capsule  and  label 
are  put  on  and  the  bottles  are  packed  in  cases  or  baskets 
ready  for  shipment. 

The  cellars  are  located  at  Reims,  Epernay,  Ay,  Avize, 
etc.,  and  are  well  worth  seeing. 

FRENCH    WINES. 

The  word  "claret"  means  a  wine  of  clear,  red  color.  It 
is  the  English  name  given  to  the  red  wines  of  France,  and 
particularly   those   grown   in   the    Bordeaux   district. 

Chateau  wines  are  those  made  from  grapes  of  a  selected 
character  and  grown  on  vineyards  of  wealthy  gentlemen, 
who  devote  much  time  and  money  in  their  careful  cultivation, 
storing  and  aging.  Chateau  bottled  wines  rank  very  high 
in    the    estimation    of   the    connoisseur. 

Wines  described  as  bearing  the  Cachet  du  Chateau  are 
simply  those  which  have  the  crest  or  coat  of  arms  bearing 
that  name  on  the  label.  The  caps  and  corks  are  likewise 
branded. 

There  are  hundreds  of  districts  where  good  wines  are 
grown.  To  enumerate  their  varieties  would  fill  volumes, 
and  with  a  limited  space  at  disposal  it  is  impossible  to 
give  more  than  superficial  indication  of  the  best  known 
brands.  The  wines  of  France  have  a  recognized  classifi- 
cation,   according    to   value. 

WINES    OF    ITALY. 

Italy  ranks  second  in  the  wine  production  of  the  world. 

I  T 


Its  Brolio  is  one  of  the  best  Italian  red  wines;  it  resembles 
Burgundy,  but  is  somewhat  drier  on  the  palate.  When  old 
it  is  a  highly  tonic  wine.  Barbera  is  another  good  wine; 
it  ranks  as  good  table  or  dinner  wine.  Also  white  Corvo 
Capri,  Lacrymae  Christi  are  strong,  sweet  wines  of 
southern  Italy.  There  are  many  others,  both  still  and 
sparkling,  amongst  which  may  be  named  Moscato  Spumante 
(sparkling  Moselle  flavor).  Nebiolo  Spumante  Valpolicella 
(sparkling)  red  wine.  There  is  also  sparkling  Lacrymae 
Christi. 

Italian  wines  are  well  known  and  highly  appreciated  all 
over  the   world. 

WINES    OF   GERMANY. 

German  wines  are  grown  principally  on  the  banks  of 
the  Rhine,  and  are  generally  known  as  Hocks.  Those  grown 
on  the  banks  of  the  Moselle  are  designated  as  Moselles. 
There  are  many  varieties  of  German  wines,  and  their  names 
denote   principally    the   district    of  their   growth. 

German  wines  are  of  great  medical  value.  They  are 
strengthening  to  the  action  of  the  heart  and  diffuse  cheer- 
fulness, without  leaving  adverse  results,  which  more  alco- 
holic beverages  might  produce.  Moselle  wines  especially 
are  prescribed  by  the  medical  profession  as  highly  beneficial 
in  all  affections  of  the  liver  and  kidneys.  They  are  consid- 
ered anti-diabetic  in  their  action  and  to  minimize  gouty 
tendencies. 

SWEET   BITTERWINES 

French  wines  have  been  divided  into  four  distinct  classes, 
namely:  Red  Wines,  White  Wines,  Sparkling  Wines  and 
Liqueur  Wines.  In  the  latter  class  are  included  all  the 
various  aperitifs  such  as  Dubonnet,  Amer  Picon,  Byrrh 
Wine,  Absinthe,  etc.  The  red  wines  of  France  and  those 
of  the  Medoc  or  Bordeaux  district  especially,  are  tonics,  and 
generally  recuperative  in  their  action.  They  contain  but  a 
moderate  amount  of  tannin,  a  feeble  acidity,  and  are  rich 
in    iron,    phosphates    and   phosphoric    acid. 

Dubonnet  is  an  appetizer  made  from  a  sweet  French 
wine,  strongly  infused  with  a  solution  of  Peruvian  bark.  Its 
tonic    properties    are    extensively    acknowledged. 

Amer  Picon,  a  French  bitters,  or  aperitif,  made  from 
French    sweet  wine   infused  from  bitter  herbs. 

Byrrh  wine  is  a  high-class  appetizing  and  tonic  wine, 
and  an  exceedingly  good  stimulant.  It  is  made  from  old 
wine  infused  with  bitter  herbs  and  quinquinas.  With  min- 
eral waters   it   makes    a   very   refreshing   drink. 

Absinthe,  is  a  highly  aromatic  liqueur  of  an  opaline, 
greenish  color,  and  slightly  bitter  taste.  It  is  distilled  from 
bitter  herbs,  and  is  considered  tonic  and  stomachic,  although 
its  excessive  use  produces  a  morbid,  stupefying  condition 
differing   from   ordinary   form   of   alcoholism.      The    mode    of 


drinking  it  is  by  mixing  with  water,  which  is  poured   into  it 
drop  by   drop. 

LIQUEURS 

Benedictine  is  a  high-class  liqueur,  distilled  exclusively 
at  Fecamp,  Normandy.  It  was  originally  made  by  the 
Benedictine  monks,  but  since  the  French  revolution  it  has 
been  manufactured  by  a  secular  company,  according  to  the 
original  recipe.  Its  medicinal  properties  are  of  an  acknowl- 
edged high  order. 

Maraschino  is  made  from  cherries  griottes,  grown  chiefly 
in  the  south  of  France.  It  has  a  unique  perfume  and  an 
agreeable  taste. 

Anisette.  The  basis  of  this  cordial  is  anis  seed.  Its 
properties  for  facilitating  digestion  and  preventing  secondary 
fermentation,  which  causes  dyspepsia,  are  well  known  and 
acknowledged;  it  is  not  only  an  agreeable  but  also  a  salutary 
cordial,  known   throughout  the   world. 

Chartreuse  is  a  highly  esteemed  tonic  cordial,  obtained 
by  the  distillation  of  various  aromatic  plants  and  some 
species  of  nettles  growing  on  the  Alps.  There  are  some 
other  ingredients  and  herbs  used,  but  these  are  a  secret 
belonging  to  the  Carthusian  monks,  from  which  order  the 
name  Chartreuse  is  derived.  It  was  formerly  distilled  by 
the  monks  at  the  monastery  of  the  Grande  Chartreuse  in 
France,  but  since  their  expulsion  it  has  been  made  at 
Tarragona,   Spain,   where   the   order   is   now   established. 

Sloe  Gin  is  a  species  of  the  wild  damson.  It  is  a  dis- 
tillation of  unsweetened  gin,  mixed  with  an  infusion  of  the 
juice  of  the  sloe  berries,  and  is  a  delightful  cordial.  Its 
medicinal  attributes  are  very  special,  being  slightly  laxative 
and  very  soothing  in  cases  of  griping  pain.  With  hot  or 
cold  water  it  makes  a  very  agreeable  drink,  and  is  also  used 
in   cocktails,    fizzes,    rickies,    daisies,    etc. 

Kummel.  The  foundation  of  kummel  is  caraway  seed, 
and  its  dietetic  properties  are  somewhat  similar  to  anisette. 
It  is  invaluable  for  indigestion  or  dyspepsia.  It  is  also 
known  in  Russia  as  Alish,  and  is  used  there  extensively  as  an 
after-dinner  cordial. 

Kirschwasser  is  a  spirituous  liqueur  obtained  by  the  dis- 
tillation of  Switzerland  wild  cherries.  It  is  distilled  chiefly  in 
Vosges  and  in  the  Black  Forest.  It  is  free  from  sweetness, 
has  a  delicious  flavor  of  bitter  almonds,  and  is  colorless  as 
water. 

Creme  de  Cacao  is  made  from  the  beans  of  cacao.  The 
chuao,  the  finest  of  which  come  from  Puerto  Cabello,  is  re- 
markable for  its  delicacy  and  perfume,  and  adds  the  most 
delicate  effect  to  the  small  quantity  of  alcohol  which  this 
cordial   contains. 

BITTERS. 

Specifically,  thev  are  liqueurs  (mostly  spirituous")  in 
which   herbs,   generally  bitter   herbs,   are   steeped  or  infused. 

13 


Bitters  are  appetizers  and  beneficial  for  other  medicinal 
purposes. 

Angostura  is  a  bitter  tonic  much  used  in  the  West 
Indies  as  a  preventive  against  malarial  fever.  It  is  also 
ased  as  a  flavoring  substance  for  all  kinds  of  drinks,  cock- 
tails, etc.,  to  which  it  imparts  a  unique  flavor.  It  was  orig- 
inally made  at  Angostura,  a  city  in  Venezuela.  Now  it  is 
made    at    Trinidad    by    the    successors    of   Dr.    Siegert. 

Amer  Picon  is  a  French  bitters,  or  an  aperitif,  made 
from    French    sweet    wine    infused    with    bitter    herbs. 

Orange  bitters  have  a  bitter-sweet  flavor  of  the  juice 
of  the  orange,  and  is  much  used  in  the  preparation  of 
cocktails. 

There  are  many  bitters  which  take  their  names  from 
manufacturers,  such  as  Abbotts,  Bookers,  Boonekamps,  Hos- 
tetters,    Pycharni,    Fernetbranca,    etc. 

Calisaya  is  a  bitter  tonic  infused  with  calisaya  or 
Peruvian  bark.  It  is  an  aromatic  aperitif  appetizer,  much 
esteemed  in  all  European  cities.  It  is  made  in  France  from 
the    finest   quality   of   muscated   wine   and    Peruvian   bark. 

VERMOUTH. 

Italian  Vermouth  is  a  bitter-sweet  wine.  Its  component 
parts  are  a  muscated  wine,  aromatized  with  the  infusion  of 
herbs  and  spices  and  sweetened  with  pure  sugar.  It  is  forti- 
fied with  brandy  to  about  fourteen  to  eighteen  per  cent. 
Wormwood  is  one  of  the  chief  herbs  used  in  Vermouth, 
and  from  it  takes  its  name.  It  is  extensively  used  in  the 
preparation    of    cocktails. 

French  Vermouth  is  made  in  and  around  Cette,  France. 
The  French  Vermouth  differs  from  the  Italian  by  being  less 
sweet  and  somewhat  lighter  in  color.  In  France  it  is  one 
of  the  chief  aperitifs  and  makes  the  finest  cocktails  and 
highballs. 

BRANDIES    OR    COGNAC. 

Brandy  is  an  abbreviation  of  Brandy  Wine,  and  is  a 
spirituous  liqueur  obtained  by  the  distillation  of  wine.  The 
name  brandy  is  also  given  to  the  distillates  from  peaches, 
apricots,  cider,  etc.  In  England  a  common  kind  of  brandy 
is  distilled  from  malt  liquors,  to  which  the  flavor  and  color 
of  brandy  are  added,  and  this  is  called  British  brandy. 

Cognac  brandy  is  acknowledged  the  standard,  especially 
those  produced  in  the  department  of  Charente,  south  of 
Cognac,   France. 

California  brandies  are  also  much  appreciated  and  arc 
increasing  in   the   estimation   of  the   consumer. 

WHISKEY. 

We  may  take  it  as  an  accepted  fact  that  both  by  custom 
and  research  it  has  been  found  that  alcohol  in  its  various 
forms  has  its  legitimate  place  in  the  dietary  of  both  healthy 
and  diseased  organisms.  The  uncertainty  of  its  effects,  how- 
ever,   compels    the    medical    profession   to    require    a    reliable 

14 


spirit,  for  unless  alcohol  is  completely  el'frninated  from  the 
organism,  its  effects,  being  cumulative,  are  unsatisfactory; 
their  effects  increase  in  geometrical  progression  with  each 
succeeding  dose.  Care  must  be  exercised  therefore  in 
selecting  whiskey  or  other  spirit  for  general  use.  Medical 
opinion  seems  only  to  recognize  the  fact  that  new  whisky 
contains  oils  which  are  assumed  to  be  amylic  alcohol  or 
fusel-oil,  and  which  must  be  got  rid  of  by  rectification  or 
age.  Little  attention  is  given  to  the  other  essential  oils,  the 
secondary  products  of  the  more  correct  materials  of  distilla- 
tion. These  may  be  either  useful  or  detrimental  in  that 
they   assist   or   retard    the    elimination   of  the   alcohol. 

A  properly  distilled  and  well  matured  whisky  made  from 
a  fully  malted  barley  is  the  one  to  be  selected.  The  essen- 
tial oil  of  malt  being  a  bland  and  harmless  substance,  fulfils 
a  very  useful  therapeutic  office,  as  by  its  diaphoretic  action 
upon  the  skin  it  promotes  and  increases  excretion,  and  con- 
sequently mitigates  the  accumulative  effects  of  the  alcohol. 
Both  pure  malt  whiskey  as  well  as  genuine  cognac  brandy 
possess  benerlcient  qualities  in  their  secondary  products, 
the  resulting  ethers  of  which  have  peculiarly  pleasing  char- 
acteristics. 

Amylic  aclohol,  on  the  contrary  (the  essential  oil  of  grain 
whisky),  is  poisonous  even  in  minute  doses,  and  is  most 
difficult  to  eliminate  from  the  whiskey  by  any  process.  Its 
deleterious  effect  may  be  recognized  by  a  paralyzing  influ- 
ence upon  the  skin,  which,  closing  the  doors  of  escape  for 
the  alcohol  when  consumed,  produces  feverish  symptoms, 
furred  tangue,  thirst  and  headache.  Whiskey  containing  it 
has  earned  therefore  the  reputation  of  being  "the  Devil  in 
Solution."  It  is  also  necessary  to  avoid  spirit  of  any  kind 
to  which  saccharine  or  other  softening  ingredients  have  been 
added.  For  some  reason  not  apparent  in  the  present  state 
of  our  knowledge  of  the  chemistry  of  digestion,  the  tendency 
of  sugar  to  turn  acid  on  the  stomach  is  increased  when 
taken   in   combination   with  alcohol. 

Alcohol  plays  an  important  part  in  the  arrest  of  phthisis 
— particularly  among  those  who  have  delicate  skins  and  per- 
spire freely  the  advantageous  effects  produced  in  these  cases 
bv  the  entire  abandonment  of  all  medication,  and  the  em- 
ployment of  considerable   doses  of  spirit  is  well   established. 

All  those  cases  which  are  characterized  by  weakness  of 
the  heart,  failing  circulation,  inability  to  take  food,  loss  of 
power  of  sleep,  and  exhaustion,  come  under  the  category  of 
suitable  cases  in  which  the  best  liqueur  brandy  or  fine  old 
malt  whiskey  is  indicated  as  the  most  suitable  form  of  alco- 
hol that  can  be  used,  no  matter  how  much  one  has  to  pa}' 
for  it. 

The  physiological  action  of  alcohol  of  whatever  variety 
is  greatly  modified  by  climate,  habits  of  life,  and  the  hourly 
changes  in  the  atmosphere.  A  humid  climate,  whether  it 
be  hot  or  cold,  seems   not  onlv  to  tolerate  its  use,  but  often 


to  require  a  stimulant;    but  in  dry  a,nd  hot  countries  whisky 
should   be   sparingly   used. 

RUM. 

The  term  rum  is  an  abbreviation  of  rumbullion.  Rum 
is  a  spirit,  distilled  from  the  juice  of  sugar  cane,  and  also 
from  molasses,  in  countries  where  sugar  cane  is  not  culti- 
vated. 

The  best  qualities  of  rum  are  made  in  the  West  Indies 
and  are  named  after  the  place  of  manufacture,  such  as 
Jamaica  Rum,  Antigura  rum,  and  St.  Croix  rum. 

New  England  and  Medford  rum  was  one  of  the  chief 
alcoholic  drinks  of  this  country,  but  its  consumption  has 
considerably  diminished  through  prohibition  laws  and  the 
steady  advance  oi  the  use  of  whisky.  The  medicinal  prop- 
erties of  rum  are  unquestioned,  and  for  home  remedies  it  is 
still  in  the  lead.  As  a  stimulant  it  is  considered  most  ef- 
ficacious. The  Medford  rums  are  also  made  in  Massa- 
chusetts and  enjoy  great  popularity.  They  are  distilled  on 
the    same    principle    as    New    England    rums. 

GIN. 

Gin  is  an  aromatic  spirit  prepared  from  rye  and  other 
grain   and  flavored  with   the  juice   of  the  juniper  berry. 

Plymouth  is  a  favorite  sweet  gin  and  is  known  in  Eng- 
land   as    Plymouth    gin. 

Domestic  gins  are  becoming  more  popular  at  the  present 
time  than  ever  before.  They  are  gins  distilled  in  the  United 
States  and  possess  all  the  attributes  of  the  imported,  and 
in  consequence  of  the  heavy  import  duty,  the  price  is  much 
lower. 

Gordon  and  High  and  Dry  and  Plymouth,  are  among  the 
leading  imported  gins  sold  in  the  United  States. 

ALES,  BEERS,  PORTER,  STOUT. 

Ale  is  a  light  colored  beer  made  from  malt  which  is 
dried  at  a  low  heat.  (Pale  ale  is  made  from  the  palest  or 
lightest    colored    malt.) 

Beer  is  the  same  as  the  English  word  ale,  and  is  the 
common  word  for  all  malt  liquors.  There  is,  however,  a 
specific  distinction.  Ale  is  lighter  colored  than  beer  of  a 
certain  strength,  made  from  malt  and  water.  Beer  is  rather 
darker   in   color   and    is    made    of   malt,    hops    and   water. 

Stout  means  a  stouter  and  heavier  quality  than  porter. 
It  is  brewed  from  the  high  dried  malt  and  is  treated  in  the 
same  way  as  porter.  London  and  Dublin  stouts  are  con- 
sidered  the  best. 

Root  beer  is  a  beverage  containing  the  extracts  of 
various  roots  such  as  dock,  dandelion,  sarsaparilla  and 
sassafras. 

Ginger  ale  is  an  effervescent  drink  very  similar  to  ginger 
beer.     It  ranks,  however,  as  an  aerated  water  beverage. 

16 


Malt  extracts  are  concentrated,  unfermented  infusions 
of  malt.  They  are  considered  most  efficacious  in  furthering 
nutrition. 

ALCOHOL. 
Alcohol    (ethyl)   is   the  distillate,  or  product,  of  anything 
containing    starch    or   sugar.      It    is    highly    inflammable,    and 
burns     without     smoke     or    residue.       Its     normal     proof    is 
about    192%. 

CELLAR  MANAGEMENT. 

Cellar  Temperature. 

The  most  desirable  place  for  the  storage  of  wine  _  is 
an  underground  structure.  The  walls  should  be  thick,  with 
double  doors,  and  the  floor  dry  and  concreted.  Hot  water 
pipes,  skylights  or  badly  fitting  doors  are  most  detrimental, 
as  they  are  destructive  to  a  uniform  temperature.  There 
should,  however,  be  an  abundance  of  ventilation,  and  the 
thermometer  kept  at  about  56  deg.  Fahrenheit,  which  should 
not  vary  more  than  2  or  3  degrees  upon  either  the  hottest 
summer  or  coldest  winter  day.  Excessive  heat  or  cold 
destroys  the  life  of  the  wine.  A  flaming  gas  jet  is  not  ad- 
visable if  ventilation  is  insufficient,  because  when  lighted 
the  temperature  rises,  creating  too  much  heat  near  the 
top    of    the    cellar,    and    when    extinguished    it    quickly    falls. 

Binning. 

There  should  be  only  three  tiers  or  bins  in  the  cellar, 
and  the  bottles  placed  in  them  with  their  noses  inclined, 
if  anything,  a  little  downward,  in  order  to  ensure  the 
corks  being  always  kept  wet  with  the  wine.  The  bottles 
should  look  as  neat  and  regular  as  it  is  possible  to  make 
them.  Carelessness  in  binning  will,  of  course,  lead  to  much 
breakage.  Examine  each  bottle  to  see  that  it  is  properly 
corked  and  that  there  is  no  leakage  before  binning  away, 
although,  perhaps,  an  infinitesimal  leakage  may  not  be  det- 
rimental, but  perhaps  the  reverse.  The  bottles  should  not  be 
laid  down  in  the  bin  unless  in  good  condition,  and  if  not 
bright  must  be  stood  up  for  twenty-four  hours  until  the 
deposit  has  been  precipitated,  to  prevent  it  settling  in  the 
neck  of  the  bottle  and  coming  into  the  decanter  when 
decanted.  Stout  young  wines  of  good  quality  obtain  a 
maturity  and  generous  flavor  by  being  binned  in  places  of 
moderate  warmth,  provided,  of  course,  that  they  are  not 
kept  there  too  long,  but  champagnes,  Rhine  wines  and 
Moselles  should  be  kept  in  a  cool  place. 

Decanting 

Before  filling  the  decanters  they  should  be,  of  course, 
thoroughly  clean  inside  and  out,  and  the  mouth  of  the  wine 
bottle  very  carefully  wiped  to  remove  all  the  exudation 
which  will  be  found  adhering  to  it:  this  should  ensure  the 
wine   being  served   in   perfect  condition,   for   even    the   slight- 

17 


est  cloudiness  destroys  that  delicacy  of  flavor  which  is  its 
chief  charm.  To  extract  the  cork  without  shaking  the  wine, 
the  bottle  must  be  taken  carefully  by  the  neck  with  a  steady 
hand  and  the  corkscrew  inserted  in  the  exact  centre  of  the 
cork  with   the  bottle  lying  in   a  horizontal  position. 

Use  no  strainer,  but  place  a  candle  in  such  a  position 
tha:  its  light  will  shine  through  the  wine  as  it  passes  be- 
tween the  bottle  and  the  decanter.  As  soon  as  any  sedi- 
ment appears,  the  operation  must  be  stopped  at  once  so  that 
none  of  it  will  get  into  the  decanter. 

No  wine  should  be  served  at  table  that  is  defective  or 
"corky"  (a  term  to  indicate  wine  that  has  been  tainted  by  the 
sap  of  the  cork  wood),  which  is  easily  detected  by  the 
smell. 

All  wines  throw  a  deposit,  rich  wines  more  than  others. 
The  crust  of  Porf  wine  of  only  one  or  two  years'  formation 
is  naturallly  not  so  firm  as  that  which  has  been  kept  tor  a 
longer  period.     Dry  wines    take   longer  tt)    mature   than   rich. 

Port  wine  should  be  decanted  at  the  bin  in  the  cellar, 
from  half  an  hour  to  two  hours  before  wanted,  the  decanter 
being  placed  in  the  Dining  Room  after  it  is  filled,  and  served 
at  the  temperature  of  the   room. 

PORT    WINE 

In  the  selection  of  the  Port  wine,  much  depends  upon 
the  weather,  as  the  physical  conditions  of  those  who  par- 
take of  it  must  be  considered;  people  accustomed  to  open 
•air  exercise  enjoy  generous  wines,  and  in  warm  weather, 
light  tawny  wine   should  be  preferred. 

In  some  houses  it  is  customary  to  drink  a  vintage  Port 
no  younger  than  twenty  years  in  bottle,  but  there  are  many 
good  wines  which  mature  in  from  four  to  six  years  and  ac- 
quire sufficient  perfection  to  satisfy  the  connoisseur  who  is 
not  too  fastidious.  If  more  than  one  quality  of  Port  wine 
is  required,  it  is  better  to  commence  with  the  richer  or 
younger  wine  and  follow  with  the  drier  or  older. 
CLARETS. 

Clarets  do  not  throw  a  deposit  as  quickly  as  Port  wine, 
but  the  greatest  care  must  be  exercised  in  decanting  them 
in  order"  that  they  may  be  served  in  brilliant  condition; 
the  sediment  being  extremely  fine,  with  a  bitter  flavor,  it  is 
not  easily  detected  and  will  entirely  spoil  the  delicacy  of  the 
wine   if   mixed   with  it. 

Clarets  moved  from  one  cellar  to  another,  are  tempo- 
rarily put  out  of  condition;  it  is  like  transplanting  a  tree 
without  giving  it  time  to  recover  and  develop  in  its  new 
soil,  therefore,  wine  always  requires  to  settle  down  before 
being   consumed.. 

Old  wines  particularly  need  a  rest  after  a  journey,  and 
they  should  always  be  taken  from  the  cellar  direct  to  the 
Dining  Room.  This  is  important,  but  it  is  a  very  general 
^mission   in  hotels   and   clubs. 


Claret,  to  acquire  the  proper  temperature,  should  be 
stood  up  in  the  Dining  Room  the  morning  it  is  to  be  con- 
sumed, and  decanted  at  least  half  an  hour  before  serving. 
A  full  wine  may  be  kept  a  little  longer,  as  it  improves  by 
contact  with  the  air.  Young  or  cheap  Clarets  should  also 
be  carefully  decanted  because  any  sediment  coming  into  the 
glass   destroys  the  character  of  the  wine. 

It  is  most  inadvisable  to  serve  Claret  in  a  decanting 
basket,  it  should  always  be  decanted,  because  the  last  one 
or  two  glasses  invariably  run  muddy.  Claret  should,  if 
possible,  be  put  on  the  table  at  about  the  temperature  of 
the  room  in  which  it  will  be  consumed,  to  preserve  the  deli- 
cate freshness  of  the  wine.  The  bouquet  escapes  when  the 
wine  is  exposed  to  sudden  heat  or  warmed  to  excess;  this 
bouquet  is  mainly  due  to  volatile  vinous  ethers  which  it  is 
most  desirable  to  retain.  Clarets  of  medium  quality  im- 
prove with  age,  whereas  the  lightest  table  wines  may  be 
drunk  fresh  bottled,  as  is  the  custom  in  France;  a  fine, 
large,  thin  and  white  glass  being  used,  and  only  two-thirds 
filled. 

Sherry  and  stronger  wines  are  liable  to  throw  a  deposit 
in  bottle  if  kept  for  any  length  of  time;  care  should  there- 
fore be  exercised  in  decanting  them  or  in  fact  any  wine 
in    which   a   sediment    may   be   formed. 

The  sound  and  natural  wines  of  Bourdeaux  are  refresh- 
ing and  appetizing,  and  are  the  best  type  of  a  universal 
beverage  for  every  day  use;  no  other  wines  which  the 
world  produces  are  capable  of  yielding  such  lasting  pleas- 
ures to  the  palate.  They  have  also  the  additional  advantage 
that  when   mixed  with    water   do   not   spoil. 

When  taken  with  food  they  entice  the  languid  palate  and 
are  admirably  adapted  for  persons  of  all  ages  and  condi- 
tions, whose  occupations  tax  the  brain  more  than  the  mus- 
cles, and  as  they  contain  only  a  comparatively  small  per- 
centage of  alcohol  have  but   little   tendency  to   inebriate. 

The  dietetic  value  of  Claret  has  not  been  over-rated. 
If  taken  with  food  it  is  of  service  to  persons  of  the  gouty 
temperament,  as  it  stimulates  digestion  and  does  not  create 
acidity.  The  combination  of  the  various  saline  ingredients 
with  fruit  acids,  notably  the  acid  tartrate  of  potash  (Cream 
of  Tartar)  make  for  its  highest  value. 

The  delicate  aroma  and  delicious  flavour  of  the  finer 
sorts  of  after-dinner  Claret  give  endless  delight  and  satis- 
faction: and  there  are  so  many  varieties  (differing  according 
to  the  vineyards  from  which  they  emanate)  they  afford  the 
connoisseur  a  wide  scope  for  the  exercise  of  judgment  in 
selection. 

19 


MOSELLE. 

Moselle  as  a  highly  etheral  wine  is  also  very  useful  in 
cases  of  cerebral  and  cardiac  exhaustion,  it  stimulates  the 
action  of  the  liver  and  kidneys,  and  is  generally  credited 
with  being  otherwise  beneficial.  It  is  said  to  be  anti-dia- 
betic, and   does   not   increase   the   gouty  tendency. 

HOCKS. 

Hocks  have  great  fragrance  and  vinosity  and  are  pre- 
eminently the  wines  most  suitable  for  intellectual  enjoy- 
ment, as  they  are  particularly  exhilarating  and  increase  the 
appetite.  Being  of  light  alcoholic  strength  but  rich  in  vola- 
tile ethers,  they  are  exceedingly  efficacious,  and  do  not 
(like    Clarets)    so    quickly    spoil    after    opening. 

The  finer  qualities  widely  differ  in  flavour  from  each 
other,  and  being  rich  in  ethers  are  much  valued  as  a  stimu- 
lant in  sustaining  the  nervous  force  of  the  heart,  while  its 
enfeebled    muscular   tissue   has    time    in   which    to    recuperate. 

For  serious  nervous  prostration  their  value  as  a  remedy 
can  hardly  be  over  estimated;  their  beneficial  effects  being 
strikingly  exhibited  in  bringing  back  a  stronger  and  steadier 
heartbeat,  thus  calming  any  attendant  irritability  which  is  of 
the   utmost   importance   to    the   patient. 

SHERRY. 

There  are  no  wines  which  can  compare  with  genuine 
Sherry,  either  in  generous  character,  delicacy  of  flavor  or 
dietetic,  value.  It  represents  about  the  highest  development 
of  quality  in  wine,  is  distinguished  by  freedom  from  acidity, 
sugar  extractive  matter,  and  has  a  high  proportion  of  vola- 
tile ethers.  These  compound  vinous  ethers  (to  which  Wine 
of  a  certain  class  and  age  owes  the  greater  part  of  its 
flavor  and  bouquet)  have  a  scarcely  less  important  influence 
in  advancing  the  quality  of  wine  than  in  providing  a  valu- 
able stimulant  to  the  vital  functions  in  cases  of  cerebral 
and   cardiac   exhaustion. 

It  relieves  that  condition  of  sleeplessness  consequent 
upon  slow  and  inefficient  digestion,  of  old  age.  It  is  also 
beneficial  in  the  later  stages  of  severe  febrile  diseases,  with 
great  exhaustion  and  sleeplessness.  A  really  good  and  pure 
Sherry  has  the  same  effect  in  rapidly  restoring  strength  and 
regularity  to  the  heart's  action  in  certain  forms  of  chronic 
neuroses — also  in  those  severe  neuralgic  affections  which  so 
seriously  affect   the    system. 

The  older  bottled  wines  and  those  having  the  greatest 
amount  of  ethers  are  most  effective.  The  finest  wine  that 
can  be  procured  for  money  is  just  that  which  will  give  the 
best  effect  with  the  least  possible  delay.  It  must  not  be  for- 
gotten that  the  .  influence  of  such  wine  is  entirely  distinct 
from   that    of   mere   alcohol. 

In  Spain,  where  its  qualities  are  well  known,  it  is  regu- 
larly used  by  physicians  as  a  restorative  in  cases  of  collapse 
after    surgical    operations. 


It  should  also  be  mentioned  that  it  is  invaluable  for  use 
as  medicine  (but  not  as  a  beverage)  in  the  wasting  dis- 
eases of  children,  particularly  when  they  lose  weight  rapidly. 
It  is  conspicuously  useful  in  such  cases  when  the  develop- 
ment  of  tuberculosis    is    feared. 

In  opposition  to  a  very  general  idea,  it  is  the  opinion 
of  Dr.  Garrott,  confidently  confirmed  by  Dr.  Francis  E. 
Anstie,  in  his  interesting  book,  "Uses  of  Wines  in  Health 
and  Disease,"  that  the  non-saccharine  or  dry  Sherries  are 
not  productive  of  gout,  provided  they  do  not  cause  any  dis- 
turbance of  the  digestive  functions.  Dr.  Anstine  claims  that  it 
is  only  the  saccharine  of  alcoholic  liquors  which  develop 
gouty   manifestations    or    evoke    the    tendency   of   latent    gout 

Port  is  a  valuable  medicine,  and  old  crusted  Wine  a  rare 
luxury. 

It  represents  nearly  all  the  elements  of  a  fine  wine,  be- 
sides being  most  agreeable  to  a  refined  palate.  An  old 
bottled  wine  when  judiciously  used,  with  its  fine  volatile 
ethers,  is  singularly  useful  in  restoring  strength  and  regu- 
larity to  the  heart's  action,  and  for  certain  forms  of  anemia 
it  is  nearly  always  beneficial.  A  full  flavored  potent  wine  of 
moderate  age  retaining  much  of  the  richness  of  its  original 
flavor  is  for  such  purposes  the  best  agent,  the  object  being 
to  employ  only  such  wine  as  will  exert  the  maximum  of 
good    influence   upon   both    appetite    and    digestion. 

In  case  of  acute  hemorrhage  even  an  excessive  quan- 
tity of  Port  Wine  administered  at  the  right  moment  has 
been  found  to  have  the  result  of  resurrection  from  almost 
certain    d^ath. 

WHEN  AND  HOW  TO  SERVE  BEVERAGES. 

Appetizer. — Dry  Pale  Sherry,  plain  or  with  a  dash  of 
bitters.     Vermouth  plain  or  Cocktails. 

With  Oysters. — Rhine  Wine,  Moselle,  Dry  Sauternes, 
Chablis   or  Capri.      Cool. 

With   Soup. — Sherry,   Madeira   or   Marsala.      Cool. 

With  Fish. — Sauternes,  Chablis,  Rhine  Wine,  Moselle 
or  Capri,  Brolio  White.     Corvo. 

With  Entrees. — Claret  or  Chianti.  Temperature  of 
room. 

With  Roast. — Claret,  Burgundy  or  Chianti.  Tempera- 
ture   of  room. 

With  Game. — Champagne  (Cold);  Old  Vintage  Cham- 
pagne.    Cool. 

With    Game. — Red    Burgundy.      Temperature    of    room. 

With   Pastry.— Madeira.      Cool. 

With    Cheese. — Port.      Temperature    of    room. 

With  Fruit. — Tokay,  Malaga  or  Muscat.  Temperature 
of   room. 

With  Coffee. — Brandy  or  Cordials.  Temperature  of 
room. 

21 


If  you  do  not  wish  to  serve  such  a  variety,  use  the  fol- 
lowing, viz.: 

Either  Sherry  or  Sherry  and  Bitters,  Vermouth  or  Cock- 
tails   as   an    appetizer. 

Either  Rhine  Wine,  Moselle,  Sauternes,  Chablis  or 
Capri   with   oysters   and   fish. 

Either  Sherry,   Madeira   or   Marsala  with    Soup. 

Either  Champagne  Claret,  Burgundy,  Chianti  or  Whis- 
key   High    Ball    throughout    the   meals. 

Either   Brandy   or   Cordials  after   dinner. 

Either  Ale  or  stout  with  oysters,  fish,  cold  meats,  steaks, 
(-hops   or  bread   and   cheese. 

APPENDIX. 

^here  is  notliing  like  good  advice  if  only  people  will 
tuke  it.  An  intelligent  comprehension  of  the  action  of  the 
various  alcoholic  liquors  will  do  more  to  advance  the  cause 
of  temperance  than  a  vigorous  adhesion  to  a  dogma.  Both 
Wines  and  Spirits  have  undoubtedly  their  legitimate  place  in 
the  sustentation  of  healthy  and  diseased  organisms  and 
forms  the  commonest  of  all  household  remedies  for  a  large 
number  of  ailments,  therefore  the  few  words  upon  their 
dietetic  utility  will   not  have  been  out  of  place. 

As  a  rule  the  vigorous  frame  and  perfect  digestion  of 
a  healthy  young  or  middle-aged  person  recpiires  only  a  very 
moderate  allowance,  but  in  failing  health  and  disease  the 
uses  of  Wines  and  Spirits  are  invaluable  and  numerous. 
Possibly,  however,  the  differences  in  their  effects  are  not  yet 
understood,  either  by  the  public  or  even  by  the  majority  of 
medical  men,  as  their  action  is  greatly  controlled  by  their 
different  combinations. 

If  taken  with  suitable  food  and  in  proper  quantities 
absorption  is  more  gradual,  and  being  diluted,  unquestion- 
ably aid  the  digestion  and  assimilation  of  food.  Recogniz- 
ing that  these  are  beverages  of  ordinary  life,  their  selection 
must  be  carefully  made,  with  a  due  regard  to  purity  as  well 
as   to   the   idosyncrasies   of   the   consumer. 


I 


A    CLOVER    LEAF. 

In  genuine  old  fashioned  American  hot  weather  nothing 
seems  to  tickle  the  palate  like  a  good  American  drink,  and 
the  kind  selected  generally  indicates  the  characteristics  of 
the  person  drinking.  In  winter  a  man  will  take  almost  any- 
thing that  happens  to  be  the  fad  for  the  moment,  whether 
highl}-  flavored  or  not,  but  in  summer  the  demand  is  for 
something  that  will  quench  the  thirst,  whether  beer,  lemon- 
ade or  gin  rickey  or  some  other  beverage.  The  Clover 
Leaf  is  said  to  be  popular  in  the  city  of  brotherly  love. 
Certainly  it  is  decorative,  for  it  has  a  soft  orchid  color,  with 
a  rim  of  white. 

Drink  is  made  of: 
2  teaspoonful  of  sugar 
100%   dry  gin 
10%    raspberry   syrup 
White  of  an  egg 
i    sprig   of    mint. 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice,  shake  well,  strain  in  cham- 
pagne glass   and   serve. 

A   SOUL    KISS. 

\i  spoonful  sugar 
50%    Byrrh  wine 
2S%    rye   whiskey 
25%    French   Vermouth 
Juice    i   orange 
Fill  glass   with   ice. 

Shake  with   shaker  and  strain  top  off  with  fizz  water. 

AN   ALE   CUP. 

Ingredients. — One  bottle  of  Bass  Ale,  1  gill  of  water, 
1  glass  of  Sherry,  the  juice  of  two  lemons  and  the  fine 
rind  of  one,  1  tablespoonful  of  Castor  sugar,  a  few  leaves 
of  fresh  mint,  a  pinch  of  grated  nutmeg,  crushed  ice. 

Method.— -Remove  the  lemon  rind  well  in  thein  fine  strips, 
put  them  into  a  jug,  add  the  sherry,  water,  lemon  juice 
sugar,  mint  and  nutmeg,  cover  and  let  the  liquid  stand  for 
20  minutes,  strain  into  a  glass  jug,  add  a  few  pieces  of  ice 
and  the  ale,  then  serve. 

AN    OXFORD    UNIVERSITY    "NIGHTCAP" 

Beat  up  the  yolks  of  eight  eggs  with  refined  sugar  pul- 
verized and  a  nutmeg  grated;  then  extract  the  juice  from 
the  rind  of  a  lemon  by  rubbing  loaf  sugar  upon  it,  and  put 
the  sugar  with  a  piece  of  cinnamon  and  a  quart  of  Bass  & 
Co.'s  Barley  Wine,  or  Strong  Ale,  into  a  saucepan,  place 
it  on  the  fire,  and  when  it  boils  take  it  off,  then  add  a  single 
glass  of  gin,  or  this  may  be  left  out,  put  the  liquor  into  a 
spouted  jug,  and  pour  it  gradually  among  the  yolks  of  eggs, 
etc.  All  must  be  kept  well  stirred  with  a  spoon  while  the 
liquor  is  being  poured  in.  If  it  is  not  sweet  enough  add 
loaf  sugar. 

23 


ABSINTHE. 

(American    style.) 
I    glass    of   fine    ice 
i   pony  of  absinthe 
Wine   glass  of  water. 

Shake  the  ingredients  until  the  outside  of  shaker  is 
covered  with  ice. 

Strain  in  glass  and  serve. 

ABSINTHE   COCKTAIL. 

One  dash  bitters 

10%  Anisette 

90%   Absinthe 

Fill   glass   with    fine    ice. 

Shake  well,  until  frapped.     Strain  in   cocktail  glass. 

ABSINTHE   DRIPPED. 

1    pony    of   Absinthe. 

Fill  the  bowl  of  your  absinthe  glass  (which  has  a  hole 
in  the  center)  with  fine  ice  and  the  balance  with  water. 
Then  elevate  the  bowl  and  let  contents  drip  into  the  glass 
containing  the  absinthe  until  the  color  shows  a  sufficiency. 
Pour  into   a   thin  bar  glass  and  serve. 

ABSINTHE    FRAPPE. 

75%  Absinthe 
25%  Anisette 
Fill   glass  with   shaved  ice. 

Shake  well  with  shaker,  strain,  fill  glass  with  fizz  water. 

ALE   BEANIE   COCKTAIL. 

50%    Irish  whiskey 
50%    Italian  Vermouth 
Fill   glass  with   broken   ice. 
Stir,    strain   and   serve. 

ALEXANDER  COCKTAIL. 

(Use    bar    glass.) 
75%   rye  whiskey 
25%    Benedictine 
1    piece   of   ice 
Twist  of  orange   peel. 
Stir  and  serve. 

ALE   SANGAREE. 

Fill  up  ale  glass  with  ale. 

1    teaspoonful   powdered   sugar. 

Stir  gently,  grate  a  little   nutmeg  on  top   and  serve. 

AMER   PICON    HIGH-BALL 

(Use    large    glass.) 
One  piece  of  ice  in  glass 
75%  Amer.  Picon 
25%   grenadine. 

Fill  glass  with  fizz  water,  stir  with  spoon  and  serve. 

24 


ANDERSON    COCKTAIL 

(Use    mixing   glass.) 
75%   dry  gin 
25%  Italian  Vermouth. 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice,  twist  piece  of  orange  peel, 
frappe,   strain   and   serve. 

ANGOSTURA    FIZZ. 

(Bar  glass.) 
Tablespoon   powdered    sugar 
Juice  half  a  lemon 
Broken  ice 
A  Pony  bitters 
White  of  an  egg 
Tablespoon  of  cream. 

Shake  well  in  shaker  and  serve. 

ANGOSTURA  GINGER  ALE. 

1  glass  ginger  ale. 
3   dashes   bitters. 

ANGOSTURA    GRAPE-FRUIT 

Cut  the  fruit  in  half,  extract  the  core  or  pithy  sub- 
stance in  the  center  with  a  sharp  knife,  insert  the  knife 
around  the  inner  edge  of  the  peel  and  disengage  the  fruit 
from  the  peel  without  removing  the  fruit  or  breaking  the 
peel,  sprinkle  plentifully  with  powdered  sugar  and  dash  the 
opening  caused  by  the  removal  of  the  core  with  Angostura 
bitters.      Ice   well   before    serving. 

APPLEJACK   COCKTAIL. 

One   dash   orange   bitters 
ioo%  cider  brandy 

2  glass   cracked  ice,   squeeze  a  piece  of  lemon   peel. 

Stir  up  with  spoon  and  strain  in  cocktail  glass. 
Drop  medium-sized   olive  in  glass  and   serve. 

APOLLINARIS    LEMONADE. 

(Use   large    glass.) 
One   tablespoonful   of   powdered    sugar 
Three  lumps   of  cracked  ice 
Juice  of  one  lemon 
One   pint  Apollinaris   water. 
Serve  with   straws. 

APPLEJACK  SOUR. 

One  teaspoonful   of  sugar 
Juice  of  one  lemon 
I   glass   cracked   ice 
ioo%   cider  brandy. 

Stir  with  spoon,  strain  in  glass,  ornament  with  fruit  in 
season. 

25 


APPLE   TODDY. 

i  teaspoonful  of  sugar  dissolved  in*  a  little  hot  water 

100%   Applejack 

I   of  a   baked  apple 

Fill    glass  2-3    full    of    boiling   water,    stir,    grate    nutmeg    or 

top,  serve. 

ARDSLEY    COOLER. 
(Use  large   thin   glass.) 
Large   piece   of   ice 
Large  spray  of  mint 
100%   dry  gin 
1    bottle    imported    ginger   ale. 

Drink  with  nose  to  mint, 

ARF   AND   ARF. 
i   glass  porter 
1    glass  ale. 

ASTRINGENT. 

75%    wine   glass   Port  wine 
25%    glass  brandy 

3  dashes  Angostura  bitters 

4  or  5  dashes  strong  Jamaica  ginger. 

Stir    gently   with    spoon    and    serve    with    a    little    nutmeg 
on  top. 

AUDITORIUM    COOLER. 
Juice  of   1   lemon 
10  dashes   raspberry  syrup 
1    dash   Angostura   bitters 
1   bottle  ginger  ale. 

Stir  well,  ornament  with  fruit,  berries  and  serve. 

BAGARDIE   COCKTAIL 

50%   Bagardie  rum 
25%   Italian  Vermouth 
25%   French  Vermouth 
Fill   glass  with  broken   ice. 
Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

BACHELOR'S    ROSE 

Juice   of  a  half  a   lemon 

Juice   of  half   lime 

Juice  of  half  orange 

White  of  an   egg 

25%   raspberry   syrup 

75%   Sloe   gin 

Fill   glass  with   cracked  ice. 

Shake   well,   strain   and   serve. 

BALLOR   COCKTAIL. 
50%    Italian  Vermouth 
50%   brandy 
h   glass   cracked   ice. 

Stir,    strain   and    serve. 

26 


BALTIMORE   EGG    NOGG. 

Yolk  of   an   egg 

1    tablespoon   of  sugar 

Add  a  little   nutmeg  and  beat  to  a  cream 

50%  brandy 

25%  Madeira  wine 

3  lumps  of    cracked   ice 
25%  Jamaica   rum. 

Fill    glass   with    milk,   shake    well,   strain    into   large    glass 
and  serve. 

BAMBO   COCKTAIL. 
50%  Sherry  wine 
50%    Italian  Vermouth 
Dash  of  orange   bitters 
\  glass   of  ice. 

Stir,  strain   and   serve. 

BARACCAS  COCKTAIL. 

25%   Fernet  Branca 
75%   Italian   Vermouth. 

Fill   glass  with  ice,   stir,   strain   and   serve. 

BARRY  COCKTAIL. 

A  very  popular  drink   in  'Frisco. 
Place  in  a  small  glass  a  piece   of  ice 

4  dashes   bitters 
50%    Plymouth   gin 
50%    Italian   Vermouth 

1  piece   of  twisted  lemon   peel 

5  drops    of  creme   de   menthe. 

Stir    it   well,    strain    it    into    a    small    bar    glass    and    serve 
with   ice  water. 

B.   B.    HIGHBALL. 
Juice   of  4   orange 
100%   Scotch  whiskey 

1  piece  of  ice  in  glass 

Fill    glass   with   ginger   ale.      Serve. 

BEALS    COCKTAIL. 

50%    Scotch   whiskey 
25%    French   Vermouth 
25%   Italian   Vermouth 

2  glass   cracked   ice. 

Frappe  and  serve   in   bar  glass. 

BEEF   TEA. 

2    teaspoonful   of   beef    extract 

Fill  glass  with  hot  water,  season  with  celery  salt. 
Stir  well  and  serve. 

BICARBONATE    OF   SODA. 

1  teaspoonful   of  bicarbonate  of  soda 

2  glass   of  water. 

Stir  and  serve. 

27 


BIJOU   COCKTAIL. 

(Use   large   glass.) 
1  glass   filled   with   shaved  ice 
50%   green  Chartreuse 
40%  Italian  Vermouth 
10%    dry   gin. 

Stir  well  with  spoon,  and  after  straining  in  cocktail 
glass  add  cherry  or  small  olive,  and  serve  after  squeezing 
lemon  juice  on   top. 

BILLIN   COCKTAIL. 

60%   Sloe  gin 
40%    Plymouth    gin 
Fill  glass  with  broken  ice. 
Stir,  strain   and   serve. 

BISHOP. 

1   teaspoonful   of  sugar 

Juice   of   2   lemon 

Juice   of  i   orange 

1    glass  of  fine   ice 

Fill   glass  with    Burgundy 

Dash   of  Jamaica   rum. 

Stir  well,  dress  with  fruits  in  season,  and  serve  with 
straws. 

BISMARCK    COCKTAIL. 

Two  dashes  Palmo  bitters 

One   dash   Absinthe 

50%    Italian  Vermouth 

50%   rye  whiskey 

Piece  of  ice  in  glass 

Twist  of  orange  peel.     Serve. 

BLACK    HAWK   COCKTAIL. 

50%   rye   whiskey 

50%    Sloe   gin 

Fill   glass  with   ice. 

Stir,   strain   and   serve    in   cocktail   glass. 

BLACKTHORNE    COCKTAIL. 

Fill  mixing  glass  2-3  full  fine  ice 

1  teaspoonful  of  syrup 

\  teaspoonful  of  lemon  juice 

2  dashes   orange  bitters 
50%   Italian  Vermouth 
2  dashes   bitters 

50%  Sloe  gin. 

Stir  ingredients  thoroughly  and  strain  in  cocktail  glass 
ana  serve. 

28 


BLACK  STRIPE. 

Use  a  whiskey  glass,  with  enough  Jamaica  rum  to  cover  bot- 
tom of  glass 

i    tablespoonful   New  Orleans  molasses. 

Place  spoon  in  glass;  hand   rum  bottle   to   customer  and 

allow  him  to   stir  and  help  himself. 

BLUE   BLAZER. 

(Use  2  metal  mugs  or  2  heavy  bar  glasses.) 
2    tablespoonful  sugar,   dissolved  in  a  little   water 
i  wine  glass  of  Scotch  or  rye  whiskey. 

Set  the  liquid  on  fire,  and  while  blazing  pour  three  or 
four  times  from  one  to  the  other.  This  will  look  like  a 
stream  of  fire;  twist  a  piece  of  lemon  peel  on  top,  with  a 
little   grated   nutmeg   and   serve. 

BOGERZ   COCKTAIL. 

Juice   of   half  a   lime 
75%   dry   gin 
25%   French  Vermouth 
Fill  glass  with  broken  ice. 
Stir,    strain    and    serve. 

BONNETT  COCKTAIL. 

Juice   of  one   lime 

50%  .  Benedictine 

50%   Italian  Vermouth 

1    piece   of    ice 

1    slice   of  pineapple. 

Stir,  top  off  with  carbonic  and  serve. 

BORNNS'   COCKTAIL. 

1    dash   brown   Curacao 
50%    dry   gin 
50%    Italian  Vermouth. 
Stir,  strain  and  serve. 


BOSTON    COOLER. 

One   bottle   imported   ginger   ale 
One  bottle  domestic  sarsaparilla. 

BOTTLE  OF  COCKTAILS. 

(For   parties.) 
1    bottle   rye  whiskey 
1  bottle  Italian  Vermouth 
1   pony  glass  of   Curacao 
1   pony  glass  of  Boker's  bitters 
Mix  well  together 
Funnel  i  full  of  fine  ice. 

Pass  liquor  through  ice  into  bottle.      Cork  well,  keep  on 
ice   until   ready   to   serve. 

29 


BOWL  OF  EGG   NOGG. 

(For  parties.) 
i  lb.  of  sugar 
10  eggs.     Yolks  should  be  separated.     Beat  yolks  with   sugar 

until  dissolved. 
Pour  in   I   pt.   Martell  brandy 
i   wine-glass   of  Jamaica   rum 
3  qts.   of  rich   milk. 

Mix  ingredients  well  with  a  ladle  and  stir  continually 
while  pouring  in  milk,  to  prevent  from  curdling.  Then  beat 
whites  of  eggs  and  put  on  top  of  mixture.     Serve. 

BRANDY   BURNED  WITH    PEACH. 

(Use    small   bar   glass.) 
i   wine   glass    of  brandy 
J   tablespoon  sugpar 
Burn  brandy  and  sugar  together  in  a  saucer. 

Place  2  or  3  slices  dried  peach  in  a  hot  stem  glass;  pour 
the  burned  liquid  over  it;  grate  a  little  nutmeg  over  it  and 
serve.     This  is  a  Southern   concoction. 

BRANDY  CHAMPRELLE. 

(Use    sherry    glass.) 
25%    Curacao 
25%   Chartreuse 
25%   Anisette 

25%    Kirschwasser   or  brandy 
2  dashes  of  Angostura  bitters. 

Attention   should   be  paid  to  prevent   from   mixing. 

BRANDY  COCKTAIL. 

1    dash   Angostura  bitters 

100%  brandy 

1    glass   cracked    ice. 

Stir,   strain  and  serve. 

BRANDY  CRUSTA. 

25%   of  Maraschino 
75%  brandy 
Juice  of  one   lemon 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Shake,  strain  in  glass,  and  trim  with  fruit   in  season. 

BRANDY   DAISY. 

1  teaspoonful  sugar 

Juice   I   lemon 

Juice   I  orange 

Juice  h  lime 

25%   raspberry   syrup 

75%  brandy 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 

Shake  and  strain.     Fill  with  fizz  water  and  serve. 

30 


BRONX  TERRACE. 

Juice  of  I  lime 

50%    dry   gin 

50%  French  Vermouth 

Fill    glass   with    ice. 

Shake  and  strain,  serve  in  cocktail  glass. 

BROOKLYN    COCKTAIL. 

1    dash    Amer.   Picon   bitters 
1   dash   Maraschino 
50%   rye  whiskey 
50%    Italian   Vermouth 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Stir   and    strain.      Serve. 

BRUT  COCKTAIL. 

Use   mixing  glass   full   of   shaved   ice 

1   dash  bitters 

10%   glass   Amer.   Picon 

90%    glass   of   French   Vermouth. 

Stir  well,  strain  into  a  cocktail  glass  and  serve. 

BUTCHER  COCKTAIL. 

50%   Scotch  whiskey 
25%   dry   gin 
25%   Italian  Vermouth 
Fill   glass  with   broken   ice. 
Stir,  strain  and   serve. 

BYRRH   COCKTAIL. 

25%   French   Vermouth 

25%   rye  whiskey 

50%   Byrrh  wine 

i  glass  fine   ice 

Stir  with  spoon  until   cold 

Strain  in  cocktail  glass. 

Squeeze  a  piece  of  orange  peel  on  top  and   serve. 

BYRRH  WINE  DAISY. 

Juice  of  quarter  of  an  orange 

Juice  of  half  a  lemon 

10%   raspberry  syrup 

90%    Byrrh  wine 

Fill  glass  with   broken   ice. 

Shake,   strain,  fill  glass  with  fizz  water. 

BYRRH    WINE    RICKEY. 

One  piece  of  ice  in  glass 

Juice  i   lime;  drop  squeezed  lime  in  glass 

100%    Byrrh   wine. 

Fill  glass  with  fizz  water,  stir  with  spoon  and  serve. 

31 


BRANDY   AND    GINGER    ALE 

i  lump  of  ice 
100%   brandy 
Bottle  of  ginger  ale 
Mix  with   spoon. 

Care  should  be  taken  that  ale  does  not  foam  over  the 
top. 

BRANDY  AND   SODA. 

3  lumps   of  broken   ice 
100%   brandy- 
Bottle  of  plain  soda  water. 

Stir  well  with  a  spoon. 

(This  is  a  delicious  summer  drink.) 

BRANDY  FIX. 

i   teaspoonful    of   sugar 
Juice  of  one  lime 
i  pony  pineapple  syrup 
2  dashes  of  Chartreuse 
Fill  glass  with   cracked   ice. 
ioo%   brandy. 

Stir  with  spoon,  ornament  with  grapes  and  berries  in 
season,  serve  with  straw. 

BRANDY    FIZZ. 

i   teaspoonful   of  sugar 
Juice  of  one  lemon 
ioo%  brandy 
Fill   glass  with   ice. 

Shake  well  with  shaker,  strain  in  glass,  fill  with  seltzer 
water  and  serve. 

BRANDY   FLIP. 

i   teaspoonful   of  sugar 

i    fresh    egg 

ioo%   brandy 

i   glass   cracked   ice. 

Shake  well  with  shaker,  strain  and  grate  a  little  nutmeg 
on  top  and   serve. 

BRANDY   FLOAT. 

Fill  pony  glass  with  brandy,  place  whiskey  glass  over 
pony  of  brandy,  \  glass  of  water,  then  withdraw  pony  glass, 
allowing  the  brandy  to  float  on  top  of  the  water. 

BRANDY   HIGH-BALL. 

i   piece   of  ice  in   a  glass 
ioo%   of  brandy. 

Fill  with  fizz  water  and  serve. 

32 


BRANDY  JULIP. 

Yz  teaspoonful  of  sugar 

Add  a  little  water  to   dissolve   sugar 

Four  sprigs   of  mint 

100%    brandy 

i    dash   of   Jamaica   rum 

Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Trim  with  fruits  in  season  and  serve  with  straws. 


BRANDY  PUNCH. 

2  tablespoonsful    of   sugar 
A  little  water  to  dissolve  sugar 
25%   syrup 
100%   brandy 

2  glass   cracked   ice. 

Shake    and    strain.      Trim    with    fruit    in    season.      Serve 
with   straws. 

BRANDY    RICKEY. 

One  piece  of  ice  in  glass 

Juice    of  half   lime 

Drop  squeezed   lime  in   glass 

100%   brandy 

Fill  glass  with  fizz  water. 

Stir  with  spoon  and  serve. 

BRANDY  SANGAREE. 

1   teaspoonful    of   sugar 
75%    brandy 
25%   Port  wine 
Fill   glass   with   ice. 

Shake,   strain   and   serve. 

BRANDY   SCAFFA. 

(Use   sherry  glass.) 
I   glass   raspberry   syrup 
4    glass    Maraschino 
1   glass   green    Chartreuse. 

Top  off  with   brandy  and  serve  like  Pousse  Cafe. 

BRANDY  SMASH. 

\   teaspoonful   of   sugar 

3  sprigs   of  fresh   mint 
100%  brandy. 

Fill    glass    with    shaved    ice    and    stir    well    with    spoon, 
ornament  with   fruit  in  season   and   serve. 

33 


BRANDY   SOUR. 

\   teaspoonful   of  sugar 

Juice   of   \  lemon 

Add  a  little  water  to  dissolve  sugar.     Stir  well  with  spoon 

1 00%  brandy 

£  glass  fine  ice. 

Shake,  strain  in  glass  and  serve  with  slice   of  orange. 

BRANDY  TODDY. 

Put  in  a  whiskey  glass: 

1  teaspoonful  of  sugar   dissolved  in  a   little  water 

1   small  piece  of  ice. 

Hand  the  bottle  of  brandy  to  the   customer  and  let  him 
help  himself. 

BRONX    COCKTAIL. 

50%   dry  gin 
25%   French  Vermouth 
25%  Italian  Vermouth 
Twist  of  orange  peel. 

Fill  glass  with  ice,  shake  and  strain,  serve. 

CALISAYA   COCKTAIL. 

100%   Calisaya 

\  glass  cracked  ice. 

Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

CALIFORNIA  SHERRY  COBBLER. 

Large  bar  glass  half  full  of  ice 

h  tablespoonful  of  sugar 

1   pony  pineapple  syrup 

1  wine   glass  California  sherry 

1   dash  bitters. 

Stir  well,  fill  up  with  ice,  dress  with  fruit,  dash  Port  wine 
on  top,  serve  with  a  straw. 

CAMPILL  COCKTAIL. 

1  dash  Absinthe 
50%    rye  whiskey 
25%  French  Vermouth 
25%   Italian  Vermouth. 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice,  stir,  strain  and  serve. 

CANADIAN   FIZZ. 

i  teaspoon  of  sugar 

50%  dry  gin 

Juice  of   1   lime 

1  fresh  egg 

Fill  glass  with  fine  ice. 

Shake  well  with  shaker,  strain,  top  off  with  fizz  water  and 
serve. 

34 


CATAWBA   COBBLER. 

i   teaspoon  of  sugar 

2  wine  glasses  of  Catawba  wine 

Fill  glass  with  fine  ice. 

Dress  with  fruits  in  season,  and  serve  with  straws. 

CUSHMAN    COCKTAIL. 
25%  French  Vermouth 
75%  dry  gin. 
Fill  glass  with  ice,  shake,  strain  and  serve. 

CURACAO    PUNCH. 

Use  large  bar  glass  half  full  of  ice 

1  tablespoon  powdered  sugar 
3  or  4  dashes  lemon  juice 
50%  brandy 

30%  Curacao 
20%  Jamaica  Rum 

2  dashes  bitters 

\  glass  carbonated  water. 

Stir  well  with   spoon,   till  up  with   ice,   dress   with   fruits, 
serve  with  straws. 

COTTON    COCKTAIL. 

1  dash  of  Absinthe, 

2  dashes  Orange   Bitters 
Twist  of  lemon  peel, 
50%  Rye  Whiskey, 
25%  French  Vermouth, 
25%   Italian  Vermouth. 

Fill  glass  with  broken  ice,  stir,  strain  and  serve. 

CREME    DE    MENTHE    HIGHBALL 

1   piece  of  ice  in  glass, 
100%  Creme  De  Menthe 
Fill  glass  with  fizz  water,  serve. 

CLARENDON   COCKTAIL. 

Mint  mulled 

Juice  of  half  a  lime 

100%   dry  gin 

1  bottle  Ginger  Ale. 

Stir  slowly  and  serve. 

CLEAVES    DELIGHT. 

50%   Grenadine, 
50%   Italian  Vermouth, 
1  piece  of  ice  in  glass. 
Stir  and  serve. 

35 


CHAMPAGNE    FRAPPE. 

Place  the  bottle  in  a  Champagfte  cooler,  fill  with  shaved 
ice  and  salt.  Turn  the  bottle  for  twenty  minutes  or  until 
the  wine  becomes   almost  frozen. 

CIDER  CUP. 

i   qt.  Cider, 
i  pony  of  Brandy, 
i  pony  of  Curacao 
i   pony  of  Maraschino, 
i  sliced  orange, 
i  sliced  lemon 

i  bottle  of  Club  soda  or  syphon. 

Place  large  piece  of  ice  in  punch  bowl,  stir  well  together, 
add  Mint  and  serve. 

COCKTAIL   A    LA    FUREY 

(Use  Schoppen  glass.) 
Fill  i  glass  with  Carbonic 
Use   mixing  glass 
75%   Holland  gin 
10%   Italian  Vermouth 
15%   French  Vermouth 
Fill  glass  with  broken  ice. 

Shake,  strain  on  top  of  1  glass  of  Carbonic  and  serve. 

CHAMPAGNE   PUNCH. 

(Use   punch   bowl.) 
4  lumps  of  sugar 
2  ponies  of  Curacao 
1   qt.  of  Ruinart  champagne 
Bottle  of  club  soda 
Juice  of  1  lemon 
Stir  with  ladle 
1  large  piece  of  ice. 

Trim  with  fruits  in  season. 

CHAMPAGNE    SOUR 

1  lump  of  sugar 

Juice  of  i  lemon 

Fill  glass  with  champagne. 

Stir  well,  ornament  with  fruits  in  season. 


CHAMPAGNE    VELVET. 

For  this  drink  a  bottle  of  champagne  and  a  bottle  of 
porter  (both  cold)  must  be  used.  Fill  the  goblet  half  full  of 
porter  and  balance  with  champagne,  stir  with  a  spoon  slowly 
and  carefully  and  serve. 

36 


COFFEE    COCKTAIL. 

h  teaspoonful  of  sugar 

i  egg 

50%  Port  wine 

50%  brandy 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 

'  Shake  well,  strain  and  serve. 

CHOCOLATE   PUNCH. 

Use  large  bar  glass  2-3  full  of  fine  ice 
£  tablespoon  sugar 
50%   Port  wine 
50%   Curacao 

1  egg  and  (ill  glass  with  milk. 

Shake  thoroughly,  strain  into  a  punch  glass  and  grate  a 
little  nutmeg  on  top  and  serve. 

CHRISTIE  COCKTAIL. 

2  dashes  Peychard's  bitters 
50%  dry  gin 

50%  French  Vermouth 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Stir,  strain  in  glass  and  serve. 

COFFEE   KIRSCH. 

(Use  wine   glass.) 
£  spoon  of  sugar 
1   pony  of  Kirschwasser 
50%  cold  black  coffee 
1   dash  of  brandy 
Fill   glass  with  fine  shaved  ice. 

Frappe  and  strain  in  wine-glass  and  serve. 
(After  dinner.) 

CINCINNATI    COCKTAIL. 

\  glass  of  beer,  fill  up  with  soda  or  ginger  ale.     This  is 
a  palatable  drink  for  warm  weather. 

CLARET   COBBLER. 

1  teaspoonful  of  sugar 

2  slices  of  orange 
2  slices  of  lemon 

2  glass  of  cracked  ice 
Fill  glass  with  claret. 

Stir   well    with    spoon,    ornament    with    fruits    in    season, 
serve  with  straws. 

CLARET  LEMONADE. 
2  teaspoonfuls  of  sugar 
Juice  of  1  lemon 
i  glass   cracked   ice 
I  glass  of  water. 

Shake  well,  dress  with  fruits   in   season,   fill   with   claret, 
pour  slowly,  so  it  floats  on  top.     Serve  with  straw. 

37 


CLARET   PUNCH. 

i   tablespoonful  of  sugar 

Squirt  of  seltzer 

Juice  of  2  lemon 

Half  glass  of  cracked'ice 

Fill  glass  with  claret. 

Stir  well,  and  ornament  with  fruits  in  season. 

COLUMBUS   COCKTAIL. 

60%  Italian  Vermouth 
40%  Hostetter's  bitters 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Frappe,  strain  and  serve. 

CONEY    COCKTAIL. 

50%   Italian  Vermouth 
50%   dry  gin 
i  glass  fine  ice. 

Frappe,  strain  and  serve. 

CONSOLIDATED    COCKTAIL. 

75%   Gordon  gin 

25%   Italian  Vermouth 

Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Shake  well,  strain  and  serve. 

CREME   DE   MENTHE  ON    ICE. 

Have  the  cocktail  glass  filled  with  fine  ice 
Fill  up  with  Creme  de  Menthe. 
Serve  with  straws. 

CRIS  COCKTAIL. 

2  dashes  Maraschino 
50%  French  Vermouth 
50%  dry  gin 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

CHAMPAGNE   CUP. 

1  quart  Champagne 

1  pony  of  brandy 

1  pony  of  Curacao 

1  pony  of  Maraschino 

1   sliced  orange 

1  sliced  lemon 

Place  large  piece  of  ice  in  punch  bowl. 

1  bottle  of  club  soda  or  syphon 

Stir  well  together,  add  mint  and  serve. 

38 


CLARET    CUP. 

i   qt.  of  claret 

i  tablespoonful  of  sugar 

i   pony  of  brandy 

i  pony  of  Curacao 

i  pony  of  Maraschino 

i  pony  of  Jamaica  rum 

i   sliced  orange 

I   sliced  lemon 

i   bottle  of  club  soda  or  syphon 

Place  large  piece  of  ice  in  punch  bowl. 

Stir  well  together,  add  mint  and  serve. 

CLOVER   LEAF  COCKTAIL. 

White  of  i  egg 

Juice  £  lemon 

i   tablespoon  Grenadine 

100%  dry  gin 

i   sprig  fresh  mint. 

Fill  glass  with  broken  ice,  shake,  strain  and  serve. 

COOK  COCKTAIL. 

Juice  i  lemon 
75%  dry  gin 
25%  Maraschino 
White  of  1  egg. 

Fill  glass  with  broken  ice,  shake,  strain  and  serve. 

COGNAC  A   LA    RUSSE. 

1  pony  of  Cognac 
1   slice  of  lemon 
Place  on  top  of  glass. 

h  cup  of  sugar  on  top  and  serve. 

CHOCOLATE   COCKTAIL. 

Yolk  of  1  egg 

50%  yellow  Chartreuse 

i  teaspoon  of  powdered  sweet  chocolate 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 

Shake  with  shaker,  strain  and  serve. 

CLIFTIN    COCKTAIL 

1  dash  Angostura  bitters 

1  dash  Curacao 

50%   Italian  Vermouth 

50%   rye  whiskey 

h  glass  cracked  ice. 

Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

39 


DUBONNET    COCKTAIL 

100%   Dubonnet 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Twist  of  orange  peel,  shake,  strain  and  serve. 

DORR    COCKTAIL. 

30%   French  Vermouth 
60%   dry   gin 
to%   Italian  Vermouth 
Twist  of  orange  peel 
i  glass  fine  ice. 

Shake,  strain  and  serve. 

DRY  MARTINI  COCKTAIL. 

50%  dry  gin 
50%   French  Vermouth 
Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 
Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

DUNHAM    COOLER. 

(Use    large    glass.) 
Peel  of  orange  (in  one  long  string.)      Place  in  glass 
\  glass  of  fine  ice 
Juice  of   1   orange 
100%  rye  whiskey. 
1  bottle  imported  ginger  ale. 
Stir  slowly  and  serve. 

DANIEL    WEBSTER    PUNCH. 

(For  12  persons.) 
Juice  12  limes 

Add  granulated  sugar  sufficient  to  make  paste 
1  pt.  St.  Croix  rum. 
Let  it  mull  for  12  hours 
Large  block  of  ice 
Add  1  qt.  Champagne 

DEVIL'S  COCKTAIL. 

10%   Devil  bitters 
90%  French  Vermouth 
Fill    glass    with    broken    ice. 
Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

DEAN    COCKTAIL. 

i   dash  Amer.  Picon 
1   dash  Maraschino 
50%  Italian  Vermouth 
50%  rye  whiskey 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Stir,  strain  in  glass  and  serve. 

40 


DOGS'  DAYS. 

100%   Scotch  whisky 
i  bottle  ginger  ale. 

2  slices  of  orange  and  serve. 


i   Cliqnot 

2  Pommery 

3  Ruinart. 


DONNELLY'S. 


EDNER    COCKTAIL. 


50%  St.  Raphael 

50%  dry  gin 

Twist  of  orange  peel. 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice,  stir,  strain  and  serve  in  cock- 
tail glass. 

EVAN'S  COOLER. 

Use  large,  thin  glass 
Wine  glass  of  Claret 
Bottle   of   imported  ginger   ale. 
Serve. 

EGG    LEMONADE. 

Use  large  bar  glass  2-3  full  of  fine  ice 
r   tablespoon  powdered  sugar 
Juice  of  1  lemon 
1   fresh  egg. 

Fill   up   glass   with   water,    shake   thoroughly,   strain   into 
a  thin  lemonade  glass  and  serve. 


EGG    NOGG,    PLAIN. 

1   tablespoonful  of  sugar 

1   fresh  egg 

100%  brandy 

1   dash  Jamaica  rum 

I  glass  of  cracked  ice. 

Shake  well,  strain,  grate  nutmeg  on  top  and  serve. 


EGG    PHOSPHATE. 

1   teaspoonful  of  sugar 
t  fresh  egg 
Juice  of  1  orange 
3  dashes  of  phosphate 
1   glass  of  cracked  ice. 

Shake  well  with  shaker,  strain  and  serve. 


41 


EGG   SOUR. 

i    teaspoonful    of    sugar 
Yolk  of  i  egg 
Juice  of  \  lemon 
i   dash  Curacao 
100%   Martell  brandy 
i  glass  cracked  ice. 

Shake  well  with  shaker,  strain  and  serve. 

ELK'S   DELIGHT. 

Juice  of  £  orange 

Juice  of  2  lemon 

100%  pure  grape  juice 

i   teaspoonful  powdered  sugar 

i   dash  bitters. 

Cracked  ice  to  half  fill  glass,  plain  water  to  finish,  shake, 
serve  in  12  ounce  lemonade  glass.  Garnish  with  slice  of 
orange  and  cheries. 

EVANS    COCKTAIL. 

1   dash  of  apricot  brandy 

1   dash  of  Curacao 

1   dash  of  bitters 

100%  rye  whiskey 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 

Stir  well,  strain  and  serve. 

EVANS  SHANDY   GAFF. 

(In    glass   pitcher.) 

1  large  piece  of  ice  in  pitcher 

2  bottles  ginger  ale 
2  glasses  of  claret. 

Dress  with  fruit  in  season  and  serve. 

FARMERS'  COCKTAIL. 

1  dash  of  Angostura  bitters 
50%  dry  gin 

30%  French  Vermouth 
20%  Italian  Vermouth 
1-3  glass  cracked  ice. 

Frappe,   strain  and  serve. 

FINE    LEMONADE    FOR    PARTIES. 

2  lbs.  of  granulated  sugar 

Grate  the   rind  of  ten  lemons   over   sugar.     Rub   in   with 
sugar  until   the   oil   is   absorbed 
Add  1  gallon  of  boiling  water. 

Stir  until  sugar  dissolves,  cool,  place  large  piece  of  ice 
in  bowl,  strain  through  cloth,  ornament  with  fruits  in  season. 

42 


FISH    HOUSE   PUNCH. 

1-3  pint  lemon  juice 

I  pound  powdered  sugar,  dissolved  in  sufficient  water 
h  pint  brandy 
i  pint  peach  brandy 
I  pint  Jamaica  rum 
4  tablespoons  Angostura  bitters 
2\  pints  cold  water. 
Ice  and  serve. 

FRANK    HILL  COCKTAIL. 

50%   cherry  brandy 
50%  brandy 
Twist  of  lemon  peel 
\   glass   of  cracked  ice 

Shake  well  in  shaker,  strain  into  cocktail  glass  and 

FREEMAN'S   BLISS. 

( In  glass  pitcher.) 
t   bottle  of  Moselle  wine 
1   pint   German   seltzer 
i   large  piece  of  ice  in  piicher. 

Dress  with  fruits  in  season  and  serve. 

FRENCH    FLAG. 

(After  dinner  cordial.) 
1-3  grenadine 
1-3  Maraschino 
1-3   Creme  de  Yvette. 

FAIRBANKS   COCKTAIL. 

1   dash   Roker's  bitters 
90%  rye   whiskey 
10%  apricot   brandy 
\  glass  of  fine  ice. 

Shake,  strain  and  serve. 

FANCY    BRANDY,   GIN    AND   WHISKEY    COCKTAILS. 

1    dash  of  syrup 

1   dash  of  Angostura  bitters 

1  dash  Curacao 
100  brandy 

Gin    or   whiskey 
\  glass  of  fine  ice. 

Shake  and  strain,  twist  a  piece  of  lemon  peel  and  serve. 

FANCY  WHISKEY  SMASH. 

Use  large  bar  glass  half  full  of  ice 

2  teaspoons  sugar 

1  wine  glass  carbonated  water 

3  sprigs  of  mint,  pressed 
1  wine  glass  whiskey. 

Stir  well,  fill  up  with  ice,  trim  with  fruit  and  serve. 

43 


GIN   AND   CALAMUS. 

(Use  whiskey*  glass.) 
Two    or    three    small   pieces    of   calamus    root    should    be 
placed  in  a  bottle  of  gin  until  the  essence  has  been  extracted. 
To  serve,  hand  out  glass  with  the  bottle,  allow  customer  to 
help    himself. 

GIN    AND    MILK. 

(Use  whiskey  glass.) 
Hand   out   glass   with   spoon   in   and   bottle   of  gin,   allow 
customer  to  help  himself,  then  fill  up  glass  with  cold  milk. 

GIN   AND  MOLASSES. 

(Use  whiskey   glass.) 
Put  enough   gin   in  glass  to  cover  the  bottom,  drop  one 
tablespoon   of   New   Orleans   molasses,  place   spoon  in   glass, 
and   allow    customer   to   help    himself   from   gin.  bottle.     Use 
hot   water   to   cleanse   glass. 

GIN  AND  TANSY. 

(Use  whiskey  glass.) 
This  is  an  old-fashioned  and  excellent  tonic.  It  is  pre- 
pared by  steeping  a  bunch  of  tansy  in  a  bottle  of  Holland 
gin,  which  will  extract  the  essence;  when  serving,  set  the 
glass,  with  the  lump  of  ice,  before  the  customer,  allowing 
him  to  help  himself. 

GIN    SANGAREE. 

Prepare  this  drink  same  as  Brandy  Sangaree,  substituting 
gin  instead  of  brandy. 

GIN   SMASH. 

t   teaspoon   of  sugar 

2  sprigs  of  mint 

Dissolve  with  little  water 

100%   dry  gin 

£  glass  cracked  ice. 

Stir  well,  serve  in  old  fashioned  cocktail  glass. 

GIN    SOUR. 

I  teaspoon  of  sugar 
ioo%  dry  gin  . 
Juice  of  i  lemon 
h  glass   of  cracked  ice. 

Shake,  strain,  slice  of  orange  and  serve. 

44 


GLASGOW   FLIP. 

25%   raspberry  syrup 
r  fresh  egg- 
Juice  of  1  lemon 
1  lump  of  ice 

Fill  glass  with  ginger  ale. 
Stir  and  serve. 

GIN  TODDY. 

(Use   whiskey   glass.) 
h  teaspoon  of  sugar,  dissolve  well  in  a  little  water 
1   or  2  lumps  of  broken  ice 
1  wine  glass  Holland  gin. 

Stir  up  well  and   serve. 

The  proper  way  to  serve  this  drink  is  to  dissolve  the 
sugar  with  a  little  water,  put  the  spoon  and  ice  into  the  glass, 
and  hand  out  the  bottle  of  liquor  to  the  customer  to  help 
himself. 

GOLDEN    FIZZ. 
I  tablespoonful  of  sugar 
Juice   of    1    lemon 
100%   of  whiskey 
Yolk  of  1   Egg 

1  glass  of  fine  shaved  ice. 

Shake  well  in  shaker,  fill  glass  with  fizz  water  mix  well 
with  spoon  and  serve. 

GRAHAM  COCKTAIL. 

25%   Fernet  Branca 
75%   Italian  Vermouth 
i  glass  of  ice. 

Shake,  strain  and   serve   in  cocktail  glass. 

GUGGENHEIMER   COCKTAIL. 

2  dashes  Fernet  Branca 
100%   Italian  Vermouth 

i  glass  cracked   ice. 

Shake,  strain  and  serve. 

GUM   SYRUP. 

Take   15  pounds  loaf  or  granulated  sugar 

1  gallon    of   water. 

Boil  for  8  or  to  minutes,  then  add  enough  water  to  make 

2  gallons. 

GIN    BUMP. 
(Use  highball   glass.) 
1  piece  of  ice  in  glass, 
Squeeze  half  of  lime  in  glass 
100%   gin 

Fill  glass  with  ginger  ale. 
Stir  and  serve. 

45 


GRENADINE     HIGHBALL 

i  piece  of  ice  in  glass 

100%  Grenadine 

Fill  glass  with  fizz  water,  serve. 

GIN    CRUSTA. 

Peel  of  i  lemon  in  long  string 
Place  in  glass 
h  glass  of  fine  ice 
i   dash  of  bitters 
Juice  of  i  lemon 
Dash   of   Maraschino 
100%  dry  gin 
And  serve. 

GIN    DAISY. 

Juice  of  i  lemon 

50%  dry  gin 

50%  raspberry  syrup 

Fill   glass   with   fin«   ice. 

Shake   with   shaker,   strain   in   glass,   fill  with   siphon   and 
serve. 


GIN    FIX. 

2  teaspoonfuls  of  sugar 
Juice  of  \  lemon 
Squirt  of  seltzer 
Fill  glass  with  ice 
100%  dry  gin. 

Stir  well,  ornament  with  fruits  in  season  and  serve. 


GIN   COCKTAIL. 

1  dash  bitters 
100%  dry  gin 
\  glass  cracked  ice. 

Stir  and   strain,  twist  a  piece  of  lemon  peel  and  serve. 

GIN   PUNCH. 

(Use   large   bar   glass   half  full    of   ice.) 
1   tablespoon  raspberry  syrup 

1  tablespoon   powdered   sugar,   dissolve   in   seltzer 
ii  wine   glasses  of   Holland   gin 

3  or  4  dashes  lemon  juice 
t   slice  of  orange,  cut  up 

2  dashes  Maraschino. 

Fill  up  with  ice,  shake  well,  and  dress  with  pineapple  and 
berries. 


46 


GIN    RICKEY, 
i  piece  of  ice  in  glass 
Juice  of  half  a  lime 
Drop  squeezed  lime  in  glass 
100%     of  dry  gin 
Fill  glass  with  fizz  water. 

Stir  with  spoon  and  serve. 


GIN    FIZZ. 


i  teaspoonful  of  sugar 

Juice  of  i  lemon 

r  dash  cream 

ioor^  gin 

Fill  glass  with  fine  ice. 

Shake,  strain,  fill  glass  with  fizz  water  and  serve. 

GIN   HIGH-BALL. 

i  piece  of  ice  in  glass 
100%     dry  gin. 

Fill  glass  with  fizz  water,  stir  and  serve. 

GIN    JULIP. 

h  tablespoonful  of  sugar 
3  sprigs    of    mint 
i  glass    of   fine   ice 
100%   dry  gin. 

Stir  well,  trim  with   fruits   in   season  and  serve 

HALF  AND   HALF 

Mix  half  ale  or  beer  and  porter  together. 
This  is  the  American  style. 

HOCK    COBBLER 

Prepared  same  as  Claret  Cobbler,  substituting  Hock  wine 
instead. 

HOLSTEIN    COCKTAIL 

i   dash  Amer.  Picon 

50$    Cognac 

5<)S'    Blackberry  brandy. 

Frappe,  strain  and  serve. 

HAMERSLEY    COCKTAIL 

1  of  an  orange 

2  dashes    Maraschino 
25%   Italian  Vermouth 
75%   dry  gin. 

Frappe,  strain  in  glass  and  serve. 

47 


HONOLULU    COCKTAIL 

(Use  star  champ^ge  glass.) 
i    small    piece    of    ice 
3  clashes  bitters 
100%  whiskey. 

Fill   almost   up    to   top    of   glass    with    seltzer,    then    drop 
in  small  spoon  of  sugar  and  stir,  drink  while  effervescing. 

HORSES    NECK 

(Large    thin    glass.) 
2  dashes  lemon  juice 

Peel  a  lemon  in  a  long  string,  place  in  glass,  fill  glass  with  ice 
i   bottle  of  ginger  ale. 
Serve. 

HOT-BRANDY    SLING 

i  teaspoonfnl  of  sugar 
ioo%  brandy. 

Fill  glass  with  hot  water,  grate  nutmeg  on  top  and  serve. 

HOT  SCOTCH 

r   lump  of  sugar 
i   dash  of  bitters 

1  glass   boiling  water 
ioo%   Scotch  whiskey. 

Place  piece  of  lemon  peel  in  glass,  a  few  cloves  and  serve. 

HOT  SCOTCH  TODDY 

2  teaspoonfnl  of  sugar 
Dissolve  with  a  little  hot  water 
ioo%   Scotch  whiskey. 

Stir,  grate  a  little  nutmeg  on  top  and  serve. 

HOT  SCOTCH   WHISKEY  SLING 

h  lump  of  sugar 
1  glass  hot  water 
i  piece  of  lemon  peel 
too%   Scotch  whiskey. 

Grate  a  little  nutmeg  and  serve 

HOT   SPICED    RUM 

t   lump  sugar 

y2  teaspoonfnl  mixed  allspice 

Dissolve  with   a  little  hot  water 

ioo%  Jamaica   rum 

Fill  glass  with  hot  water. 

Stir,  grate  a  little  nutmeg  and  serve. 

48 


HUNTER  COCKTAIL 

75%  rye  whiskey 
25%   cherry  brandy. 

Fill  glass  with  ice,  stir,  strain  and  serve. 


HAMILTON  COCKTAIL 

75%   Byrrh  wine 
25%   Scotch  whiskey 
Fill  glass  with  broken  ice. 
Stir,  strain  and  serve. 


HOT   GIN    SLING 

1   lump  of  sugar,  dissolved  in  hot  water 
100%   Holland  gin 
Fill  with  hot  water. 

Stir  well,  grate   nutmeg  on  top,  add  a  slice   of  lemon. 


HOT    IRISH    PUNCH 

2  lumps  of  sugar 

Juice  of  \  lemon 

Dissolve  in  a  little  hot  water 

100%  Irish  whiskey 

Fill  glass  with  hot  water. 

Stir  well,  place  slice  of  lemon  on  top,  grate  nutmeg  and 
serve. 


HOT   LEMONADE 


1   tablespoonful  of  sugar 
Juice  of  1  lemon 
Fill  with  hot  water. 

Stir   well    and    serve. 


HOT   MILK    PUNCH 

1   tablespoonful  of  sugar 

50%  Jamaica  or  Medford  rum 

50%  brandy 

Fill    glass   with    boiling   hot   milk. 

Stir  well,  and  grate  a  little  nutmeg  on  top  and  serve. 


HOT    RUM 

1  lump  of  sugar,  dissolved  in  a  little  hot  water 
100%  Jamaica  rum 
Fill  with  hot  water. 

Stir  well,  grate  a  little  nutmeg  and  serve. 

49 


HUDSON   COCKTAIL 

3  dashes  of  orange  bitters 
50%   Holland  gin 
50%   French  Vermouth 
Fill  glass  with  broken  ice. 

Stir,  strain  and  serve  with  olive. 


HOCK   COBBLER 

1   teaspoonful  of  sugar  dissolved  in  a  little  water 
1    wineglass   of   Hock  wine 

Fill   with   line   ice,   stir   and   dress   with    fruits   in   season, 
serve  with  straw. 


HOT   EGG   NOG 

1  tablespoonful  of  sugar 

1  fresh  Qgg 

100%   brandy 

Fill  glass  with  hut  milk. 

Shake   thoroughly   with  shaker,   strain,   grate   nutmeg  on 
top  and  serve. 


IMPROVED    MANHATTAN   COCKTAIL. 

1  dash  bitters 
1   dash  Maraschino 
50%  rye  whiskey 
50%  Italian  Vermouth 
J  glass  cracked  ice. 

Stir,  strain  and  serve. 


IMPROVED     MARTINI    COCKTAIL. 

1   dash  orange  bitters 
Dash  Maraschino 
50%    Italian   Vermouth 
50%   dry  gin 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 
Stir,  strain  and  serve. 


IRVING    COCKTAIL. 

50%   dry  gin 

40%   French  Vermouth 

10%   Calasaya 

Slice  of  orange 

Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Frappe,  strain  and  serve. 

50 


ISABELLE  COCKTAIL. 
50%   Creme  de  Cases 
50%  grenadine. 

1   lump  of  ice  in  glass  and  serve. 

ITALIAN    COCKTAIL. 

50%  Vermouth 
25%  Fernet  Branca 
25%  grenadine. 
Fill   glass   with   ice. 

Frappe,  strain  and  serve. 

ITALIAN    WINE    LEMONADE. 

2  teaspoonfuls  of  fine  sugar 
Little  water  to  dissolve 

4  dashes   of   raspberry    syrup 
Juice  of  one  lemon 

J  glass  cracked  ice 
100%    Marsala   wine. 

Fill  with  water,  stir  and  trim  with  fruits  in  season.     Serve 
with  straws. 

IMPERIAL    EGG    NOGG. 

1  teaspoonful  of  sugar 

i  fresh  egg 

90%  brandy 

10%  Jamaica  rum 

Fill  glass  with  milk. 

Shake  well,  strain,  grate  nutmeg  on  top,  serve. 

ILLINOIS  THUNDERBOLT. 

85%   Cider  brandy  or  Jersey  Lightning 
15%   Grenadine 
Fill  glass  with  broken  ice. 
Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

JACK    ROSE 

1    teaspoonful   sugar 

10  dashes  Raspberry  syrup 

10  dashes  lemon  juice 

5  dashes   orange  juice 
Juice   I   lime 

75%  cider  brandy. 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice,  shake  and  strain,  fill  with  fizz 
water  and  serve. 

JACK   ZELLER   COCKTAIL 

50%  orange  gin 
50%  Doubonnet. 

Fill   glass   with  ice,   stir,    strain   and   serve. 

51 


JUNE    DAISY 

(In    large    gkiss.)  - 
i   teaspoonful  sugar 
10  clashes  raspberry  syrup 
Juice   2  lemon 
Juice   2   orange 
Juice   2   lime 
75%  dry  gin 
Fill  glass  with   fine  ice. 

Shake  well  together,  fill  glass  with  ginger  ale.  Stir  with 
spoon  carefully  and  serve. 

JUNE    ROSE 

(Use   large  glass  for  mixing.) 
Juice  of  one   orange 
Juice  of  2  lime 
Juice  of  2  lemon 
50%   raspberry  syrup 
50%   dry   gin 
Fill    glass   with   ice. 

Shake  well  with  shaker,  strain,  fill  glass  with  fizz  water 
and  serve. 

JUNKINS   COCKTAIL 

One  teaspoonful  gum  syrup 
i   dash  Angostura   bitters 
ioo%   rye   whiskey 
i   piece   of  clear  ice. 

Stir,    twist   piece    lemon    peel   on    top  and   serve. 

JERSEY   LILY   POUSSE   CAFE 

(Use    pon}'    glass.) 
]/2   green   Chartreuse 
l/2    Cognac  brandy 
10  drops  Angostura  bitters. 

Pour  brandy  in   carefully  so  it  will  not  mix  and  serve. 

JERSEY   SUNSET 

Into  a  straight  champagne  glass  put  a  scant  teaspoonful 
of  sugar  with  enough  water  to  dissolve.  Add  a  twist  of 
lemon  or  lime  peel  and  half  a  whiskey  glass  of  line  Old  Mon- 
mouth Applejack.  Now  put  in  enough  broken  ice  to  cool, 
fill  with  water  and  finish  with  a  dash  or  two  of  Angostura 
bitters,  which  should  not  be  stirred  in,  but  be  allowed  to 
drop  slowly  through  the  amber  mixture,  imparting  to  it  the 
sunset  hues  that  probably  suggested  its  name. 

In  winter,  instead  of  ice,  hot  water  is  used,  making  a 
most  genial   drink — A   Hot  Sunset. 

52 


JAMAICA    RUM    SOUR 

■2  teaspoon  powdered  sugar 
Juice  of   i  lemon 
100%    Jamaica    rum. 

Fill  glass   with   ice,   shake    well,   strain   and   serve. 

JAPANESE   COCKTAIL 
_'  dashes   Curacao 
50',     Italian    Vermouth 
30' !    rye  whiskey 
20r'(    grenadine   syrup 
Fill  glass  with   ice. 

Frappe,   strain   and   serve. 

JENKS    COCKTAIL 

1   dash    Benedictine 
50%   Italian   Vermouth 
50%   dry  gin 
Fill  glass   with  ice. 

Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

JUDGE   SMITH   COCKTAIL 

90%   rye  whiskey 
to%  apricot  brandy. 

Fill    glass   with    ice,   stir,    strain    and    serve. 

JERSEY    SOUR 

l/2   teaspoonful  sugar 
100%  applejack 
Juice  of   1   lemon 
i  glass    cracked   ice. 

Shake  well  with  shaker,  strain  top  with  a  little  fizz  water 
and  serve  with  slice  of  lemon. 

JERSEY  COCKTAIL 

r  dash  Angostura   bitters 
50%   Italian    Vermouth 
50%   of   cider   brandy. 

Mix  well,  twist  of  lemon  peel  on  top  and  serve  in  cocktail 
glass. 

JOHN    COLLINS 

(Use  large  glass.) 
1  tablespoonful  of  sugar 
Juice    1    lemon 
Juice   i  lime 
3    lumps   of   ice 
100%  Holland  gin 
1  bottle  club  soda 

Stir  up  well,  remove  the  ice  and  serve. 

S3 


KIRSCHWASSER    PUNCH 

h  teaspoonful   sugar 
Juice  i  lemon 
25%   Chartreuse 
75%   Kirschwasser 
Mix  well  with  spoon 
2-  glass  cracked  ice. 

Ornament  with  fruits  in  season  and  serve  with  straws. 

KNICKEBEIN      ■ 

1  dash  Angostura  bitters 
Yolk  of  1  egg 
i  pony  of  Benedictine 
i  pony  of  kummel. 

See  that  different  ingredients  are  not  mixed. 

KNICKERBOCKER 

1  tablespoonful  raspberry  syrup 
Juice  1  lemon 

100%  St.   Croix  rum 

2  dashes  Curacao 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 
Trim  with  fruits  in  season. 

(After    Dinner) 
LITTLE    MAX1NE 

(Serve    in    pony    glass.) 
1-3  Val.  d'Ema   (liqueur) 
1-3  green   Creme  De  Menthe 
1-3    Creme   Yvettc 

LEMONADE 

(Use   large  bar   glass,   half   full   of   ice.) 
1    heaping    tablespoonful   of  sugar 
6  or  8  dashes  of  lemon  juice. 

Fill  up  with  water,  shake  well,  dress  with  fruits,  serve 
with  straw.  When  customer  wishes  lemonade  strained,  put 
into  smaller  glass  and  place  slice  of  orange  in  glass. 

An  Angostura  Lemonade  is  made  like  the  foregoing  with 
the   addition   of   1   teaspoonful   Angostura    bitters. 

LEONORA  COCKTAIL 

25%  orange  juice 
50%  gin   (dry)' 
25%  raspberry  syrup 
i   glass   cracked    ice. 

Frappe.   strain  and   serve. 

54 


LIBERAL    COCKTAIL 
i   clash  Amer.   Picon 
50%   Italian   Vermouth 
50%  rye  whiskey 
Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 
Stir  and  strain,  serve. 

LEOWI  COCKTAIL 

-' V  <     Booth's  orange  gin 
50%  dry  gin 
25%  French  Vermouth 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Stir,  strain  in  cocktail  glass  and  serve. 

LAWRENCE  COCKTAIL 

Three   dashes   of   Paychard   Bitters 

30%   dry  gin 

20%  Italian  Vermouth 

30%  French  Vermouth 

20%  sloe  gin. 

Fill  glass  with  broken  ice,  shake,  strain  and  serve. 

"MULLED    ALE" 

Ingredients. — One  quart  of  Bass  &  Co.'s  Barley  Wine,  or 
Strong  Ale,  one  glass  of  rum  or  brandy,  one  tablespoonful 
of  Castor  Sugar,  a  pinch  of  ground  cloves,  a  pinch  of  grated 
nutmeg,  a  good  pinch  of  ground  ginger. 

Method. — Put  the  ale,  sugar,  cloves,  nutmeg  and  ginger 
into  an  ale-warmer  or  stew-pan  and  bring  nearly  to  boiling 
point,  add  the  brandy  and  more  sugar  and  flavoring  if  neces- 
sary and  serve  at  once. 

MULLED  ALE  or  A  BURTON  ON  TRENT 

Take  one  quart  of  Bass  &  Co.'s  Barley  Wine,  or  Strong 
Ale,  two  eggs,  a  teaspoonful  of  powdered  ginger  or  nutmeg, 
two  tablespoonfuls  of  castor  sugar  and  one  ounce  of  butter. 
Beat  up  the  eggs  separately.  Put  the  ale  in  saucepan,  add 
the  ginger  (or  nutmeg),  sugar  and  butter.  When  nicely 
warm,  but  not  boiling,  pour  slowly  into  the  jug  containing 
the  beaten  eggs;  stir  well  and  then  warm  the  mixture  on 
fire  without  bringing  to  boiling  point. 

MANHATTAN    COCKTAIL 

1   dash  Boker's  bitters 
50%   Italian  Vermouth 
50%   rye  whisky 
i  glass  cracked  ice. 

Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

55 


MARGUERITE  COCKTAIL 

2  dashes  Field's  orange  bitters 

50%   Plymouth  gin 

50%   French  Vermouth 

1   dash  absinthe 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 

Stir    up    well    with    spoon,    strain    in    cocktail    glass    and 
serve. 


MARTINI    COCKTAIL 


1  dash  orange  bitters 
50%   dry  gin 
50%   Italian  Vermouth 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Stir,    strain    and    serve. 


MURPHY  COCKTAIL 


40%   Italian  Vermouth 
40%  rye  whiskey 
20%  sloe  gin 
h  glass  cracked  ice. 

Frappe   and   strain.     Serve. 


MOSELLE   CUP 

1   quart   Moselle 
1   pony  of   Brandy 
1  pony  of  Curacao 
1   pony  of  Maraschino 
1   sliced  orange 
1   sliced  lemon 

1  bottle  of  club  soda  or  syphon, 
Place  large  piece   of  ice  in  punch  bowl. 
Stir  well  together,  add  mint  and  serve. 


MEDFORD    RUM    PUNCH 

1  teaspoonful  sugar 
Juice  of  2  lemon 
Dissolve  in  little  water 
100%   Medford  rum 
\  glass  cracked  ice. 

Stir  with    spoon,    dress    with    fruits    in    season   and    serve 
with  straws. 

56 


MAY    WINE    PUNCH 

(Use   large   punch   bowl.) 

Two    bunches    of    (Waldmeister)    Woodruff    cut    in    two 
or    three    lengths.     Place    it    into    a    large    glass,    fill    up    with 
Martell   brandy,   cover  it  up,   let  it   stand   for  two   hours   until 
the  essence   of  the   Woodruff  is   extracted;   cover   the   bottom 
of  the  bowl  with   granulated   sugar 
5  bottles  club  soda  over  it 
Cut  up  four  oranges  in  slices 
J  pineapple,   berries,  cherries,  grapes 
8  bottles  Deinhard-Moselle  wine 
i  bottle  Ruinart  champagne 
50%   Curacao 
50%   Maraschino 
50%   brandy 

Then  put  your  Woodruff  and  brand}7,  etc.,  into  the  three 
gallons  of  excellent  May  wine  punch. 

Surround  the  bowl  with  ice,  serve  in  wineglass  in  such 
a  manner  that  each  glass  will  get  a  piece  of  all  fruits:  then 
fill  with  ladle  and  serve. 

METROPOLITAN    COCKTAIL 

50%   French  Vermouth 
50%     brandy 
2   glass  fine  ice. 

Shake,   strain   and  serve. 

MEDFORD    RUM    SMASH 

1  teaspoonful   sugar 

2  sprigs  of  mint  pressed  in  sugar  to  extract  the  essence 
ioorr   Medford  rum 

2  glass  cracked   ice. 

Stir   with   spoon,   dress   with   fruits  in   season,   serve   with 
straws. 
Fill   glass  with   milk. 

MEDFORD     RUM     SOUR. 

1  teaspoonful  sugar 

Juice  of  t  lemon 

too%   Medford  rum 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 

Stir  well  with  spoon,  strain  and  dress  with  fruits  in  sea- 
son and  serve. 

MERRY   WIDOW 

50%   Byrrh    wine 

50%   dry  gin 

Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Stir  and  strain  in  cocktail  glass,  twist  of  orange  peel  and 
serve. 

57 


MILK    PUNCH 

2  teaspoonfuls   sugar 

i   clash  Jamaica  rum 

100%   rye   whiskey 

2  lumps   ice 

Fill  glass  with  cold  milk. 

Shake  and  strain,  grate  little  nutmeg,  serve  with  straws. 

MILK   SHAKE 

25%  raspberry  syrup 

2  lumps  of  ice 

Shake,  strain  and   serve. 

MILK    AND    SELTZER 

i  glass  seltzer 
i  glass  milk. 
1  teaspoonful  sugar 
Fill  glass  with  ginger  ale, 
Serve. 

MINT    JULEP 

(Large    bar    glass.) 

1   teaspoonful    of   sugar 

Add  enough  water  to  dissolve   sugar 

3  sprays  fresh  mint,  press  until  extracted 
h  glass  of  ice 

100%  rye  whiskey 
1   dash  Jamaica  rum. 

Place  four   sprigs   of  fresh    mint  on   top,   trim  with   fruit 
in  season,  serve  with  straws. 

MISSISSIPPI    PUNCH 

(Use  large  bar  glass.) 

1  tablespoonful   sugar 

Enough  water  to  dissolve  the  sugar 
3  or  4  dashes   lemon  juice 

2  dashes  Angostura  bitters 
i  wine  glass  Jamaica  rum 

i   wine  glass  Bourbon  whiskey 
I   wine  glass  brandy. 

Mix   well,    fill    up    with    ice.    rim    with    fruits,    serve    with 
straws. 

MONTGOMERY 

75'  <    rye  whiskey 
25%  Vermouth 
1   slice   of  orange 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Shake,   strain  and   serve. 

58 


MONTANA  CLUB  COCKTAIL 

(Use  large  bar  glass,  half  full  of  ice.) 
2  dashes  Angostura  bitters 

2  dashes  Anisette 
50%   French  Vermouth 
50%  brandy. 

Stir  with  spoon;  strain  in  cocktail  glass,  put  in  olive  and 
serve. 

MORNING    COCKTAIL 

(Use   large    glass.) 
Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice 
1  clash   Curacao 
1  dash  Maraschino 
1   dash  absinthe 
i  dash  bitters 
50%  brandy 
50%   Italian  Vermouth. 

Stir  with   spoon,  strain   in  whiskey  glass,  twist  of  lemon 
peel  on  top  and  serve. 

MILLIONAIRE'S  COCKTAIL 

50%   dry  gin 

40%   French  Vermouth 

to%   Grenadine 

Juice  of  a  half  lime. 

Fill   glass  with  broken  ice,  stir,   strain  and  serve. 

MORNING  GLORY  FISS 

Juice   of   1    lime 
Juice   of   -V  lemon 
i  teaspoonful  sugar 
White  of  1  egg 
100%   Scotch  whiskey 
i  glass  cracked  ice. 

Shake  well  with  shaker,  strain,  fill  glass  with  fizz  water. 

MULLED  CLARET 

1  lump  of  sugar 

:j  teaspoon   cinnamon 

1  teaspoon  fine  cloves 

\  teaspoon   fine  allspice 

3  or  4  dashes  of  lemon  juice 

2  dashes   bitters 

2  jiggers  of  claret. 

Use  a  large  bar  glass,  heat  a  poker  red  hot  and  stick  into 
liquid  until  it  boils,   strain   and   serve  in  hot  claret. 

NORTH    POLE    COCKTAIL 

75%   French   Vermouth 
25%   Fresh  pineapple  juice 
Fill  glass  with  broken  ice 

Shake,    strain   and   serve. 

(Dampen  edge  of  glass  and  dip  in  powdered  sugar.) 

59 


NEW    ORLEANS    FISS 

h  teaspoonful  of  powdered  sugar 

Juice  of  half  a  lime 

Juice  of  half  an  orange 

Juice  of  half  a  lemon 

25%   Creme  Yvette 

White  of  1  egg 

75%   dry    gin 

1  teaspoonful  of  cream 

Fill  glass  with  broken  ice  , 

Shake   for  five  minutes,  strain  and   serve. 

NATIONAL  GUARD  PUNCH 

r   tablespoonful  sugar 

Juice  1  lemon 

Pony  of  raspberry  syrup 

100%  brandy 

Fill  glass  with   cracked  ice 

2  dashes  Jamaica  rum. 

Stir  well,  trim  with  fruits  in  season.     Serve  with  straws. 

NICHOLAS  COCKTAIL 

50%    orange    gin 

50%   sloe  gin 

Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

"ONE   YARD   OF   FLANNEL"  or  "ALE    FLIP" 

Put  a  quart  of  Bass  &  Co.'s  Barley  Wine,  or  Strong 
Ale,  on  the  fire  to  warm,  and  beat  up  three  or  four  eggs 
with  four  ounces  of  moist  sugar,  a  teaspoonful  of  grated  nut- 
meg or  ginger  and  a  quarter  of  good  old  rum  or  brandy. 
When  the  ale  is  near  to  a  boil  put  into  one  pitcher,  and  the 
rum  and  eggs,  etc.,  into  another;  turn  it  from  one  pitcher  till 
it  is  smooth  as  cream. 

OLD    OXFORD     COLLEGE     MULLED     ALE 

Take  i  lb.  Cinnamon,  \  11).  Cloves,  put  both  into  a 
saucepan  with  two  quarts  of  water,  put  it  over  the  fire  till 
it  boils,  then  let  it  simmer  for  an  hour,  then  strain  it  oft 
into  a  jug.  and  when  cold  put  the  liquid  into  a  bottle  and 
well  cork  down. 

When  making  Mulled  ale,  add  one  wineglass  of  the 
liquid  to  every  quart  of  Bass  &  Co.'s  Barley  wine  or  Strong 
Ale,  adding  a  little  ginger  and  loaf  sugar  to  taste.  Heat  the 
ale  over  a  brisk,  fire,  but  be  sure  not  to  let  it  boil,  as  that 
alters  the  flavor,  but  take  it  off  just  before  it  boils. 

Add  a  few  slices  of  lemon,  and  a  wine-glass  of  gin  to 
every  quart. 

60 


OYSTER    COCKTAIL 

(Use   star  champagne  glass.) 
i  dozen    small    oysters 
i   dash  lemon  juice 

i   teaspoonful  Tomato  and  Chile  sauce 
3  dashes   Paprika  sauce 
2  dashes  vinegar 
i   dash  Tabasco  sauce 

Shake   on   top   a    little    salt   and   pepper,   stir   gently  with 
spoon  and  serve. 

OLD   FASHIONED   COCKTAILS 

i   dash  Angostura  bitters 

i   dash  Curacao 

Piece  of  cut  loaf  sugar 

Dissolve  in  two  spoonfuls  of  water 

100%  liquor  as  desired 

i  piece  of  ice   in   glass. 

Stir   well   and    twist    a    piece    of   lemon    peel    on    top    and 
serve. 

OLIVETTE   COCKTAIL 

(Use   large   bar   glass   half  full    of   ice.) 

2  dashes   syrup 

3  dashes    orange    bitters 
3  dashes  Absinthe 

i   dash  bitters 
ioo%   dry    gin. 

Stir    with    spoon,    strain    in    cocktail    glass,    put    in    olive, 
twist  lemon  peel  on  top  and  serve. 

ORANGE    COCKTAIL 

Juice  of  4  or  an  orange 

i  dash  Chartreuse 

75%   dry  gin 

25%   Italian  Vermouth 

Fill   glass  with    broken   ice. 

Shake,  strain  in  orange  peel  and  serve. 

OLD    DELAWARE     FISHING    PUNCH 

i   tablespoonful  sugar 

Juice    of    1    lemon 

Dissolve    with    a    little    water 

50%  of  St.  Croix  rum 

50%  of  brandy 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 

Stir    well    with    spoon,    dress    with    fruits    in    season    and 
serve  with  straw. 

61 


ORANGEADE 

i   spoonful  sugar 
100%  orange  juice 
25%   raspberry  syrup 

2  glass    cracked    ice. 

Fill    with    water    or    seltzer,    trim    with    fruits    in    season, 
serve  with  straws. 

ORCHARD    PUNCH 

1   tablespoonful  orchard  syrup 

1  tablespoonful  pineapple   syrup 
100%   California  brandy 

Fill   glass   with    ice. 

Mix  well,  trim  with  fruits  in  season,  1  dash  of  port  wine 
and  serve  with  straws. 

ORGEAT   PUNCH 

(Use  large  bar  glass   half  full   of  ice.) 
50%    Orgeat  syrup 
50%  brandy 
4  or  5  dashes  lemon  juice 

Stir  well,  fill  up  with  ice,  dash  with  Port  wine,  trim  with 
fruit  and  serve. 

OYSTER    BAY    COCKTAIL 

50%   Curacao 
50%   dry  gin 
4  glass  ice. 

Shake,  strain  and  serve. 

PALMETTO  COCKTAIL 

(Mixing    glass    half    full    of    ice.) 

3  dashes  Angostura  bitters 
50%   Santa  Cruz  rum 

50%   Italian    Vermouth. 

Stir  well,  strain   into  cocktail   glass  and   serve. 

PARISIAN 

100%   Byrrh  wine 
Juice  of  1  lime 

2  pieces   of  ice  in  glass. 

Stir,  fill  glass  with  seltzer  and  serve. 

PARISIAN    POUSSE    CAFE 

(Use   Pousse   Cafe  glass.) 
2-5   Curacao 
2-5  Kirschwasser 
1-5   Chartreuse. 

A  celebrated  drink  in  Paris. 

62 


PARSON'S  COCKTAIL 

80%   high    and   dry  gin 
20%   Italian  Vermouth 
Piece  of  orange  peel 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Frappe,  strain  and  serve  in  whiskey  glass. 

PUNCH  A  LA   ROMAINE 

1   bottle   champagne 

1  bottle  rum 

2  tablespoons  Angostura  bitters 
10  lemons 

3  sweet  oranges 

2  pounds  powdered  sugar 
10  fresh  eggs. 

For  a  party  of  15. 

Dissolve  the  sugar  in  the  juice  of  the  lemons  and 
oranges,  adding  the  rind  of  one  orange,  strain  through  a  sieve 
into  a  bowl,  and  add  by  degrees  the  whites  of  the  eggs, 
beaten  to  a  froth.  Place  the  bowl  on  ice  till  cold,  then  stir 
in  the  rum  and  wine  until  thoroughly  mixed.  Serve  in  fancy 
stem  glass. 

PONY  OF   BRANDY 

Fill  pony  glass  with  best  brandy. 

Serve  with  small  glass  of  ice  water. 

PEACH    AND    HONEY 

(Use   whiskey    glass.) 
r   tablespoonful  pure   honey 
100%   peach  brandy. 

Stir  with   spoon  and   serve. 

PERFECT    COCKTAIL 

SO°/i    dry  gin 

50';    Italian  Vermouth 

\   Ljlass  of  cracked  ice. 

Stir,   strain  and  serve. 

PHEASANT   COCKTAIL 

50%  brandy 
50%  dry  gin 
Fill  glass  with  broken  ice. 

Frappe,   strain   and   serve. 

PICON   COCKTAIL 

80 %   Amer.  Picon 
20%   Italian   Vermouth 
2   glass  ice. 

Shake,  strain,  twist  of  orange  peel  and  serve. 

63 


PLAIN    LEMONADE 

2  teaspoonfuls   sugar 
Juice  of  i  lemon 
\  glass   of  ice. 

Shake  well  and  fill  glass  with  water,  strain,  trim  in  fruits 
of  season.     Serve  with  straws. 

PAT'S  COCKTAIL 

(Bar    glass.) 
50%   dry   gin 
40%   French   Vermouth 
10%   Italian   Vermouth 
1   dash   Curacao 
1   dash  Angostura  bilters 
1   twist  lemon  peel 
1   piece  ice 

Stir  and  serve. 

PORT   WINE    SANGAREE 

1  teaspoonful   of  sugar  with   little   water 

2  lumps  of  ice 
100%   Port  wine. 

Stir  with  spoon,  grate  a  little  nutmeg  on  top  and  serve. 

PORTER   COCKTAIL 

10%   Martini    Russie  Vermouth 

50%   French   Vermouth 

40%   dry  gin 

1   spray  of  fresh   mint 

Fill  glass  with   ice. 

Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

POUSSE    CAFE 

(Use    liquor    pony    glass.) 
1-6  of  raspberry  syrup 
1-6  of  Maraschino 
1-6  of  green  Creme  de  Menthe 
1-6  brown  Curacao 
1-6  of  yellow  Chartreuse 
1-6  Martel  brandy. 
Serve. 

PREPARING    ROCK    AND    RYE 

1  pt.  water 

1   lemon  cut  in   quarters 

\  lb.  rock  candy 

\  orange. 

Boil  together  until  rock  candy  is  dissolved;  let  it  cool 
off;  strain  through  a  cloth  and  add  one  quart  of  good  rye 
whiskey. 

Stir    well    together;    ready    for    use. 

64 


POUSSE    L'AMOUR 

(Use    sherry   glass.) 
I  glass  Maraschino 
Yolk    of    i    egg 
i  glass  vanilla  cordial 

1  glass  brandy. 

Keep  this  drink  in  separate  layers  and  serve. 

PORT   WINE    COBBLER 

2  teaspoonfnls  of  sugar 
Water  to  dissolve   sugar 
100%   Port  wine 

Fill   glass  with  cracked  ice. 

Stir  well  with  spoon,  trim  with  fruits  in  season  and  serve 
with   straws. 

PORT    WINE    FLIP 

i   teaspoonfnl  sugar 

i   egg 

100%    Port  wine 

Fill  glass  with*cracked  ice. 

Shake    well    with    shaker,    strain,    grate    a    little    nutmeg. 
Serve. 

PORT    WINE    PUNCH 

i   tablespoonful  of  sugar 
Juice  of  i  lemon 
Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice 
ioo%   Port  wine. 

Stir    with    spoon,    ornament    with    fruits    in    season    and 
serve  with   straws. 

PALMER    COCKTAIL 

i     dash  Amer.  Picon 
ioo%   rye  whiskey 
Fill  glass  with  broken  ice. 
Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

PHILADELPHIA    BRONX 

50%   dry  gin 
40%   Italian  Vermouth 
10%   French  Vermouth 
Fill  glass  with  broken  ice. 

Strain   into   an    old-fashioned   glass,    top    off   with    ginger 
ale  and  serve. 

POSTMASTER 

Piece  of  ice  in  glass 
100%   dry  gin 
Bottle   of  ginger  ale. 
Serve. 

65 


PATRICK    COCKTAIL 

50%   dry  gin 
50%   French   Vermouth 
5  drops  of  Green  Breton 
Fill  glass  with  broken   ice. 
Stir,  strain   and   serve. 

QUEEN'S    HIGHBALL 

i\   pony  Amer.   Picon 
1   pony  grenadine 

1  clear  piece  ice  in  glass. 

Fill  glass  with  fizz  water.     Serve. 

RANDOLPH 

50%   dry  gin 

40%    French  Vermouth 

10%   Bailor  Vermouth. 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice,  shake,  strain  and  serve  in  bar 
glass. 

RAPHAEL    COCKTAIL 

50%  St.  Raphael 
40%   French  Vermouth 
10%   dry    gin 

Fill  glass  with  borken  ice. 
Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

RAYMOND   COCKTAIL 

Two  dashes  of  Chartreuse 
40%   dry  gin 
30%   French  Vermouth 
30%   Italian  Vermouth 
Twist  of   lemon  peel 
Serve  in  champagne  glass. 

RED    LION    COCKTAIL 

50%   high  and  dry  gin 
40%   Italian  Vermouth 
10%   Booth's  orange  gin 
h  glass  cracked  ice. 

Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

REGENT  PUNCH 

To  one  and  one-half  pints  of  strong,  hot  green  tea  add 
one  and  one -hall  pints  of  lemon  juice,  one  and  one-half  pints 
of  Capillaire,  one  pint  Jamaica  nun,  one  pint  brandy,  one 
pint  Batavia  arrack,  one  pint  Curacao,  one  bottle  champagne, 

2  tablespoons  Dr.  Siegert's  Genuine  Angostura  bitters,  one 
sliced  pineapple,  and  two  sliced  oranges.  Mix  thoroughly  in 
a  punch  bowl.     Add  the  wine  and  ice  just  before  serving. 

66 


REMSEN    COOLER 

(Use  a  medium  size  fizz  glass.) 
Peel  a  lemon  as  you  would  an  apple 
Place   the  rind  or  peeling  into   the    fizz   glass 
2  or  3  lumps  of  crystal  ice 
i   wine-glass  of  Scotch  whiskey 
Fill  up  the  balance  with  club  soda  or   syphon. 

Stir  up  slowly  with  a  spoon  and  serve. 

In  this  country  . it  is  often  the  case  that  people  call  a 
Remsen  cooler  where  they  want  Old  Tom  gin  or  Sloe  gin  in- 
stead of  Scotch  whiskey;  it  is  therefore  the  bartender's  duty 
to  mix  as  desired. 

RENAUD'S   POUSSE   CAFE 
1-3  brandy 
1-3  Maraschino 
1-3  Curacao 

Put  in  whiskey  glass,  mix  well  with  spoon,  withdraw 
spoon  and  serve.  This  delightful  drink  is  from  a  recipe  by 
Renaud  of  New  Orleans. 

RHINE  WINE  COBBLER 

(Use  large  bar  glass  half  full  of  ice.) 
1  tablespoonful  of  sugar 

1  jigger  mineral  water 

2  jiggers  Rhine  wine. 

Fill  up  with  ice,  stir  well,  ornament  with  fruit  and  serve 
with  straws. 

RHINE  WINE   AND   SELTZER 

2   glass  seltzer. 

Fill  with   Rhine  wine  and  serve. 

RHINE    WINE    CUP 

1    qt.   of   Rhine   wine 

1   pony    of    brandy 

1   pony  of   Curacao 

r  pony    of    Maraschino 

1   sliced  orange 

1   sliced  lemon 

1   bottle  of  club  soda  or  syphon 

Place  large  piece  of  ice  in  punch  bowl. 

Stir  well  together,  add  mint  and  serve. 

RICHMOND  COCKTAIL 

1   dash  orange   Curacao 
75%   French  Vermouth 
25%   Italian  Vermouth 
Fill  glass  with  fine  ice. 

Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

67 


ROB    ROY    COCKTAIL 

Dash   of   Curacao 
50%   Sherry  wine 
50%   Italian  Vermouth 
i  glass   of  cracked  ice. 

Stir,   strain   and   serve. 

ROBERT    BURNS 

3  dashes  of  absinthe 

50%   French  Vermouth 

50%   Irish  whiskey 

I  glass  cracked  ice. 

Stir  with  spoon,  strain  and  serve. 


ROBINSON  COCKTAIL 


50%  dry  gin 
40%    Byrrh  wine 
\  glass  cracked  ice. 

Shake,  strain  and  serve. 


ROCKY    MOUNTAIN    COOLER 

1   egg 

1   teaspoonful   of  sugar 
Juice  of  1  lemon 
Fill   glass   with    cider 
Grate  a  little  nutmeg  on  top. 
Serve. 


ROMAN    PUNCH 

2  teaspoonfuls   sugar 

1  tablespoonful  raspberry  syrup 
Juice   of  half  lemon 

Juice  of  half  orange 
h  glass  cracked  ice 

2  dashes  of  Curacao 
100%  of  brandy 

2  dashes   of  Jamaica  rum 

Stir    with    spoon,    trim    with    fruits    in    season.      Sprinkle 
little  Port  wine  on  and  serve. 

ROSSINGTON    COCKTAIL 

50%   dry  gin 

50%   French    Vermouth 

Twist  of  lemon  peel. 

Fill   glass  with  broken  ice,  stir,  strain   and  serve. 

68 


ROYAL    FIZZ 

i   teaspoonful  sugar 

Juice  of  one  lemon 
100%   dry  gin 
i   egg- 
Fill  glass   with  cracked  ice. 

Shake  well,  strain,  fill  with  fizz  water  and  serve  with 
straws. 

ROYAL    PUNCH 

[   pint  hot  green  tea 

h  pint  brandy 

I  pint  Jamaica   rum 

roo%  arrack 

100%   Curacao 

50%   Genuine  Angostura  bitters 

Juice  of  3  limes 

1  lemon,   sliced 

1   cup    warm    calf's-foot   jelly 

1   cup  sugar. 

Mix  well,  while  heating  and  drink  as  hot  as  possible. 
For  party  of  six. 

RUM    DAISY 

1   teaspoonful   sugar 

1  teaspoonful  raspberry  syrup 
Juice   2   orange 

Juice   2   lime 

Juice   2  lemon 

75%   Medford  rum 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice 

Shake,  strain  and  fill  glass  with   fizz  water  and  serve. 

RUM     FLIP 

Prepare  this  drink  same  as  gin  flip,  using  Jamaica  rum 
instead  of  gin. 

RUM    FLIP 

(Western   Style.) 

2  pint  of  ale,  heated   on   fire 

1   egg  beaten  up  with  powdered  sugar. 

Put  the  ale  in  one  cup,  the  egg  in  another  with  a  small 
100%  or  rum  or  branch',  pour  from  one  cup  into  another  sev^ 
eral  times  until  thoroughly  mixed,  dash  nutmeg  on  top  and 
serve. 

RUBIE    COCKTAIL 

90%  dry  gin 
10%   Paychard  bitters 
Fill   glass   with  broken   ice. 
Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

69 


RYE    HIGH-BALL 

i   piece  of  ice   in   glass 
100%   of  rye  whiskey. 

Fill  glass  with  fizz  water  and  serve. 

RYE    WHISKEY    RICKEY 

i  piece  of  ice  in  glass 

Juice  of  half  a   lime 

Drop  squeezed  lime  in  glass 

100%  rye  whiskey 

Fill  glass  with  fizz  water. 

Stir  with  spoon  and  serve. 

SABBATH    MORNING    CALM 

White  of  one  egg 
100%  dry  gin. 

Fill  glass  with  broken  ice,  shake,  strain  and  serve. 

SAM   WARD 

Peel   A  lemon  in  one  string- 
Set  into  cocktail  glass 
Fill   with   fine  shaved   ice 
roo%  yellow  Chartreuse. 
Serve  with  straws. 

SARATOGA  COCKTAIL 

3  dashes  pineapple  syrup 
2  dashes  Angostura  bitters 
40%   Italian    Vermouth 
50%  brandy 
10%     rye  whiskey. 

Fill  glass   with   cracked  ice,  stir,  strain  in   cocktail   glass 
and  serve. 

SAUTERNE   COBBLER 

1  teaspoonful  sugar 

2  glass   cracked  ice 

Fill    glass    with    Sauterne    wine. 

Stir  with  spoon,  ornament  with  fruits  in  season  and  serve 
with   straws. 

SILVERMAN 

(Use   lkjuor   pony   glass.) 
y2  Eau-de-  Vie  de  Dantzic 
l/i  Mandarinette. 

SANKEY   PUNCH 

(For    four    persons.) 
Pony   Brandy 
Pony   Benedictine 

1  cocktail  glass   French   Vermouth 

2  cocktail  glasses  Port  Wine 
5  dashes  Angusturo 

Yolks  of  2  eggs 
Tablespoon   of   sugar. 

Shake  well  with  ice,  strain  and  serve  in  claret  glass. 

70 


SHERRY    AND    BITTERS 

i    dash   of   bitters. 

Fill   glass   with    sherry   wine   and   serve. 


SHERRY  AND    EGG 

i  teaspoonful  of  sherry 
■sh  egg 
Fill  glass  with  sherry  until  it  floats  and  serve. 

SHERRY    COBBLER 


i   fresh  egg 


2  spoonful  of  sugar 
100%  Sherry  wine. 

Stir  with  spoon  until  sugar  dissolves.  Fill  glass  with 
cracked  ice.  Ornament  with  mint,  and  fruits  in  season,  add 
little   Port  wine   on   top   and   straws.     Serve. 

SHERRY    COCKTAIL 

1  glassful   of   shaved    ice 

2  or   3   dashes    of   bitters 
i  dash  of  Maraschino 
ioo%   Port   wine. 

Stir  up  well  with  spoon,  strain  into  a  cocktail  glass,  put 
a  cherry  into  it,  squeeze  a  piece  of  lemon  peel  on  top  and 
serve. 

SHERRY  FLIP 

2  teaspoonfuls  powdered  sugar 
100'%   sherry  wine 

1  fresh   egg 

2  glass  cracked  ice. 

Shake  well  together,  strain  and  serve.  Nutmeg  if  de- 
sired. 

SHERRY  WINE   PUNCH 

i    teaspoonful  sugar 
Juice  of  half  lemon 
ioo%  sherry  wine 
Fill  glass  with  shaved  ice. 

Stir  well,  trim  with  fruit,  and  serve  with  straws. 


SHERRY  WINE  SANGAREE 

Prepare    this    drink   same   as    Port    Wine    Sangaree,    sub- 
stituting sherry  for  Port. 

71 


SILVER    COCKTAIL 

(Use  mixing  glass   Half  full  of  ice.) 
i   dash  gum  syrup 
2  dashes  orange  bitters 
i   dash  Angostura  bitters 

2  dashes   Maraschino 
50%   French   Vermouth 
50%   dry  gin 

Stir    well,    strain    in    cocktail    glass,    twist    lemon    peel    on 
top  and  serve. 

SILVER    FIZZ 
Juice  of  1  lemon 
t  spoonful  sugar 
The  white  of  1  egg 
50%   dry  gin 

Fill  glass  with   cracked   ice,   shake   and   strain. 

Top  off  with  fizz  water,  and  serve. 

SLOE    GIN    COCKTAIL 

75%   sloe  gin 

25%   Italian  Vermouth 

Fill    glass    with    ice. 

Stir  and  strain  in  cocktail  glass.     Serve. 

SLOE    GIN     FIZZ 

(Use    large    bar    glass.) 
Juice  of  half  lemon 
100%  Sloe  gin 
Half  tablespoonful  of  sugar 

Fill  glass  with   line  ice,   shake,  strain,   till  glass  with   fizz 
water,   serve. 

SLOE   GIN    HIGH-BALL 

One  piece  of  ice  in  glass 

Juice  of  2  lime,  drop  squeezed  lime  in  glass 

100%  sloe  gin. 

Fill  glass  with   fizz  water  and  serve. 

SLOE   GIN    RICKEY 

1  piece  of  ice  in  glass 

Juice  of  half  lime 

Drop  squeezed  lime  in  glass 

ico%  of  sloe  gin 

Fill  glass  with  fizz  water. 

Stir  with  spoon  and  serve. 

SODA  COCKTAIL 

1   spoonful   sugar 

3  dashes    Angostura    bitters 

Coating  inside  of  glass  with  sugar,  fill  quickly  with  ice,  add 
1  bottle  lemon  or  plain  soda. 
Two  slices  of  orange,  stir  and  serve. 

72 


SODA  LEMONADE 

2  teaspoonfuls    sugar 
Juice  of  t  lemon 

i  lump  of  ice 

i   bottle  of  club  or  lemon  soda. 

Ornament  with   fruits  in  season  and  serve  with  straws 

SODA    NEGUS 

(Use   small  punch   bowl.) 

i  pint  of  Port  wine 

i  tablespoon  Angostura  bitters 

12  lumps  loaf  sugar 

12  cloves 

i    teaspoonful    nutmeg. 

Put  above  ingredients  into  a  clean  saucepan,  warm  and 
stir  well;  do  not  let  it  boil;  pour  in  on  this  mixture  I  bottle 
plain   soda.     Put  in   punch    bowl   and  serve  in  cups. 

ST.   CHARLES   PUNCH 

(Use    large    bar    glass.) 
i  teaspoonful  sugar 

3  dashes  of  lemon  juice 
i  dash  seltzer 

75%   Port  wine 
25-%   brandy 

2  dashes  Curacao 

i   dash  Genuine   Angostura  bitters. 

Stir  well,  fill  glass  with  shaved  ice,  trim  with  friui  and 
serve  with  straws. 

ST.  CROIX  CRUSTA 

(Use  mixing  glass   half  full  of  ice.) 

3  dashes  of  gum  syrup 

i   clash   of  Peychaud  bitters 
2  dashes  of  lemon  juice 
i   dash    of   mineral   water 
2  dashes  Maraschino 
ioo%     St.  Croix  rum. 

Mix  well,  strain  into  stem  glass,  prepared  ab  follows: 
Remove  the  peel  from  one  lemon  in  one  long  string,  put  into 
stem  glass  after  moistening  and  dipping  in  sugar. 

ST.    CROIX    FIZZ 

t   teaspoonful  sugar 
Juice  of  t  lemon 
100%  of  St.  Croix  rum 
Fill  glass  with  broken  ice. 

Shake  and  strain.     Fill  glass  with  fizz  water  and  serve 

73 


ST.  CROIX   RUM   PUNCH 

i    tablespoonful    sugar 

Juice  I  lemon 

75%  St.    Croix    rum 

25%  Jamaica  rum 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 

Stir  with  spoon,  ornament  with  fruits  in  season  and  serve 
with  straws. 

ST.   CROIX    SOUR 

\  teaspoonful  sugar 
Juice  of  1  lemon 
100%   St.  Croix  rum 
Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 

Shake  with   shaker,  strain,  trim  with   fruits  in   season  and 
serve. 

STANTON    COCKTAIL 

Two  dashes   Benedictine 

50' "<    dry   gin 

50%    French  Vermouth 

Fill  glass  with  ice,  stir,   strain   rind   serve. 

STAR    COCKTAIL 

1   dash  of  orange  bitters 
50%   Italian    Vermouth 
50$    Apple   Jack- 
Fill    glass    with    ice,   stir,   strain    and   serve. 

STARBOARD   LIGHT 

(Serve   in   liquor  pony   glass.) 
<>o''<    Green    Creme    de    Menthe 
10%   brandy 
Serve. 

Delicious  after-dinner  cordial. 

SCHEUER    COCKTAIL 

(Serve   in   cocktail   glass.) 
50%    Dubonnet 
50%   Italian  Vermouth 
Cracked  ice. 

Stir  and  strain.     Serve. 

SCHULKE    COCKTAIL 

Juice  of  one-half  lime 
50%   dry  gin 
25%   orange  gin' 
25%   sloe  gin. 

Fill  glass  with   broken  ice,   stir,   strain   and   serve. 

74 


SCOTCH    HIGH    BALL 

i    piece  of  ice  in  glass 
100*%   Scotch    whiskey. 

Fill  glass  with   fizz   water  and   serve. 

SCOTH    WHISKEY   RICKEY 

i  piece  of  ice  in  glass 
Juice  of  \  lime 
Drop  squeezed   lime   in   glass 
100%  Scotch  whiskey 
Fill  glass  with  fizz  water. 
Stir  and   serve 

SELTZER    LEMONADE 

(Use    large    glass.) 
2  tablespoonfuls  of  sugar 
Juice  2  lemons 

4  or  5  small  lumps  of  broken  ice;  then  fill  up  the  glass  with 
syphon  seltzer. 

Stir  up  well  with  a  spoon  and  serve. 

SHANDY    GAFF 

Half  a  glass  of  lager 
Half  a  glass  ginger  ale. 

It  is  also  made  with   half  ale,  half  ginger  ale. 

SHONNARD   COCKTAIL 

8o%   Nickolson's  gin 
15'  \    French   Vermouth 
5%    Italian   Vermouth. 

Fill    glass    with    broken    ice,    shake,    strain    and    serve    in 
whiskey  glass. 

SHERRY    AND    ANGUSTURA 

Put  t   dash  of  bitters  in  a  sherry  glass  and  roll  the  glass  till 
the  bitters  entirely  covers  the  inside  surface. 
Fill  the  glass  with  sherry  and  serve. 

STONE    FENCE 

ioo%  whiskey 
2  lumps  of  ice 
Fill   glass  with   cider. 
Stir  well  and  serve. 

STONEWALL 

i   teaspoonful  sugar 
2  lumps  of  ice 
ioo%   whiskey 
i   bottle  of  club  soda. 

Stir  up  well  with  spoon,  remove  the  ice  and  serve. 

75 


STORY   COCKTAIL 

50%   Bonecamp  bitters 
50%  brandy 

Frappe,   strain   and   serve. 

SAUTERNE    CUP 

1   qt.  of  Sauterne 

1  pony  of  brandy, 

1   pony  of  Curacao 

1  pony  of  Maraschino 

1   sliced  orange 

1   sliced  lemon 

1  bottle  of  Club  soda  or  syphon 

Place  large  piece  of  ice  in  punch  bowl 

Stir  well  together,  add  mint  and  serve. 

SWISS    ESS 

75%  white  absinthe 
25%  Anisette 
White  of  1  egg 
Fill  with  shaved  ice. 

Shake  well  in  shaker,  strain  in  cocktail  glass  and  serve. 

SLOE    GIN    BUMP 

(Use   highball   glass.) 

1  piece  of  ice  in  glass 
Squeeze  half  of  lime  in  glass 
100%   Sloe   gin 

Fill  glass  with  ginger  ale. 
Stir   and    serve. 

TERMINAL    COOLER 

Large  piece  of  ice  in  glass 
Peel  an  orange,  in  a  long  string 
Juice  of  i  orange 
100%   Byrrh  wine 

2  dashes  Curacao 
One  bottle  ginger  ale. 

Serve  with  straws. 

TIP  TOP   PUNCH 

(Use   large  bar   glass   with   5   lumps    of   ice.) 
t   dash   of  lemon  juice 
t   lump  of  loaf  sugar 
2  slices  of  pineapple 
t    slice  of  orange. 

Fill    up    with    champagne,    stir    well,    dress    with    berries, 
dash  with   Genuine   Angostura  bitters,   serve  with   straws. 

7^ 


TOM    COLLINS    GIN 

i   teaspoon ful  sugar 
Juice  of  i  lemon 
Juice  of  2  lime 
2  lumps  of  ice 
ioorr   old  Tom  gin 
Bottle  of  club  soda. 

Stir  with   spoon.      Serve. 

TOM    COLLINS    BRANDY 

Mix   same  as   above,  substituting  brandy  in   place   of  gin. 

TOM    COLLINS   WHISKEY 

Mix  same  as  above,   substituting  whiskey  for  brandy. 

TOM    COLLINS    RUM 

Mix  same  as  above,  substituting  rum  in  place  of  whiskey. 

TOM    AND    JERRY 

(Use  large  bowl.) 

Take  the  whites  of  any  number  of  eggs  and  beat  to  a 
stiff   froth. 

Add  \y2  tablespoonfuls  of  powdered  sugar  to  each  egg. 

Beat  the  yolks  of  the  eggs  separate. 

Stir  well  together  and  beat  till  you  have  a  stiff  batter. 
Add  to  this  as  much  bicarbonate  of  soda  as  will  cover  a 
nickel.  Stir  up  frequently,  so  that  eggs  will  not  separate  or 
settle. 

(To  serve.) 

Put  i  tablespoonful  of  batter  into  Tom  and  Jerry  mug. 

100%    rum  and  brandy  mixed. 

Fill  up  with  boiling  water  or  milk,  grate  nutmeg  on  top. 
stir  with  spoon  and  serve. 

TREASURER  COCKTAIL 

75';      dry  gin 
25%      French   Vermouth 
Twist   of  orange   peel 
Fill  glass  with  broken  ice. 
Stir,  strain  and  serve. 

TRILBY    COCKTAIL 

(Use  mixing  glass  half  full  of  ice.) 
1  dash  of  orange  bitters 
1   dash  Augostura  bitters 
50%   Tom  gin 
50%  Vermouth  (Italian"). 

Stir  well,  strain  into  cocktail  glass,  add  cherry  and  float 
creme  d'vyette  on  top. 


TROWBRIDGE   COCKTAIL 

(In  whiskey  glass.) 
i  clash  Field's  orange  bitters 
20%   Italian  Vermouth 
80%   dry  gin. 

Twist  a  piece  of  orange  peel  and  serve. 

TURF    COCKTAIL 

(Use  mixing  glass  half  full  of  ice.) 
2  dashes   Absinthe 
2  dashes  Maraschino 
2  dashes  orange  bitters 
1  dash  bitters 
50%  Vermouth 
50%   dry  gin. 

Stir  well,  strain  in  cocktail  glass,  put  in  olive  and  serve. 


TURKISH  SHERBET 

(Use  a  punch  bowl.) 
Mix  as  follows: 
2  quarts    of   sweet    wine 

2  quarts  of  water 
4  pounds  of  sugar 

y2  wineglass  of  Angostura  bitters 

4  lemons,  juice  only 

6  oranges,  juice  only 

t   pound   blanched  almonds 

1   pound  Muscatel  grapes 

\  pound  figs,  cut  up 

\  pound   seedless  raisins 

1  1-3  dozen  eggs,  whites  only 

i    dozen   cloves,  a   small   piece   cinnamon   and   a   little   caramel 

coloring. 

Make    a    hot    syrup    of   the    sugar    and    water   and    pour    it 
over  the  raisins,  cloves  and  cinnamon. 

When     cool,     add     orange    and     lemon     juice     and     wine. 
Strain   and  freeze  in    the  usual   manner. 

Take    out    the    spices    and    add    the    scalded    raisins,    figs, 
grapes  and  almonds  last. 

TUXEDO   COCKTAIL 

(Use  mixing  glass  half  full  of  ice.) 
t   dash  Maraschino 
t   dash  of  Absinthe 

3  dashes  Angostura  bitters 
50%   French  Vermouth 
50%  Tom  gin. 

Stir  well,  strain  in  cocktail  glass,  add  cherry  and  serve. 


78 


TUCKER    COCKTAIL 

(Use  whiskey  glass,  twist  of  lemon   peel   in   glass.) 
One    dash    Angostura   bitters 
25%   French  Vermouth 
75%    Bourbon   Whiskey 
One  piece  of  ice   in    glass. 
Stir  and  serve. 

VANILLA    PUNCH 

(Use  large  bar  glass.) 
i    teaspoonful  of  sugar,  dissolved  in  water 

2  dashes  Curacao 

3  dashes  lemon  juice 

i   dash   Genuine  Angostura  bitters 
25%  vanilla  cordial 
75',     Cognac   brandy. 

Stir    well,    fill    up    with    ice,    trim    with    fruit,    serve    with 
straws. 

VAN    LEE    COCKTAIL 

50%   dry  gin 
40%   Byrrh  wine 
10%   Scotch  whiskey. 

Fill  glass  with  broken  ice,  stir,  strain  and  serve. 

VAN  ZANDT  COCKTAIL 

t   dash  apricot  brandy 
50%   French  Vermouth 
50%   gin 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Shake,  strain  and  serve. 

VELVET   CHAMPAGNE 

(Use    large,    thin   glass.) 
Half  pint  of  champagne. 
Half  pint  of  stout 
Serve. 

VERMOUTH   COCKTAIL 

1   dash   Boker's  bitters 
100%   Italian  Vermouth 
t   dash   Maraschino 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Frappe.   strain   and   serve. 

VERMOUTH    FRAPPE 

1    dash   Boker's   bitters 
100%   Italian  Vermouth 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Frappe,  strain   and  serve. 

70 


VICHY 

Do  not   mix  in   white   or  red   wines  as  it   turns  black. 
It  blends  well   with  Scotch  and  Irish  whiskies. 

VIRGIN    COCKTAIL 

(Use  mixing  glass  half  full  of  ice  ) 
3  dashes  Angostura  bitters 
2  dashes   raspberry   syrup 
50%  Vermouth 
50%    Plymouth  gin. 

Stir  well,  strain  in  cocktail  glass  and  serve. 

VERMOUTH     HIGHBALL 

1  piece  of  ice  in  glass 
100%  of  Vermouth. 

Fill   glass   wfth    fizz   water,  serve. 

WHISKEY    COBBLER 

1  teaspoonful  sugar 

100%   whiskey 

1  teaspoonful  fine  apple  syrup 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 

Stir  with   spoon,  dress  with   fruits  in   season.      Serve   with 
straws. 

WHISKEY   COCKTAIL 

1    dash  of  Angostura   bitters 
1    dash   of   orange    Curacao 
ioo%  whiskey 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Stir,  strain   and  serve. 

WHISKEY    CRUSTA 

Prepare  this  drink  same  as   Brandy  Crusta,  using  whiskey 
for  brandy 

WHISKEY    DAISY 

1    teaspoonful  of  sugar 

Juice   i   orange 

Juice   h   lemon 

Juice  i   lime 

25%   raspberry  syrup 

7${/c>   whiskey 

Juice  of   1    lem<n 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice. 

Shake,  strain,  fill  filass  with  fizz  water  and  serve. 

WHISKEY    FIX 

1    teaspoonful  sugar 
Juice  of  a   half  lemon 
100%   of  rye   whiskey 
Fill   glass  with  cracked   ice. 

Stir    well    with    spoon,    ornament    with     fruits    in    season 
Serve   with   straws. 


WHISKEY   FIZZ 

i  teaspoonful  sugar 
100%   whiskey 
Juice  of  i   lemon 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Shake  and  strain,   fill  glass  with   fizz  water.     Serve. 

WHISKEY     FLIP 

i   teaspoonful  sugar 

Fill   glass   with   cracked  ice 
100%   of  rye   whiskey. 

Shake,  strain  and  grate  a  little   nutmeg  on  top  and  serve. 

WHISKEY     FLOAT 

Fill  glass  half  full  of  fizz  water. 

Pour    100%'    whiskey    slowly    on    top    of    fizz    water    and 
serve. 

WHISKEY    JULIP 
i   tablespoonful   sugar 
Squirt  of  seltzer 

3  sprigs  fresh  mint 

Press  until  essence  is  extracted 
Fill  glass  with   cracked   ice 
ioo%  of  rye  whiskey. 

Stir  well  with  spoon,  dress  with  fruits  in  season,  sprinkle 
little  sugar  on  top,  dash  Jamaica  rum.      Serve  with    straws. 

WHISKEY    PUNCH 

(Use  large  bar  glass  half  full  of  ice.) 
i   teaspoonful  sugar 

4  or  5  dashes  lemon  juice 
ioo%   whiskey  and  rum  mixed 
i    dash  Angostura  bitters. 

Shake  well,  strain  into  punch  glass,  with  slice  of  orange, 
3  or  4  dashes  of   Curacao  on   top,  with   seltzer  and   serve. 

WHISKEY   RICKEY 
i    piece   of  ice   in    glass 
Juice   2   lime 

Drop  squeezed  lime  in  glass 
ioo%  of  Scotch  whiskey 
Fill  glass  with  fizz  water. 

Stir  with   spoon  and  serve. 

WHISKEY    SLING 

t  lump  of  sugar 

Enough   water  to   dissolve   sugar 

2  pieces  of  ice 

100%  of  rye   whiskey. 

Stir  with  spoon,  grate  nutmeg  on  top  and  serve. 

8i 


WHISKEY    SOUR 

Y-2  teaspoon  sugar 
Juice  of   i    lemon 
100%   rye  whiskey 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Shake    well    and    strain    in    glass;    one    slice    of    orange. 
Serve. 


WHISKEY    SMASH 

i  teaspoonful  sugar 

3  sprigs   of   fresh  mint 

Little   water   to    dissolve    sugar,    crush    mint   until    essence    is 

extracted, 
i  glass  cracked  fee 
100%   rye  whiskey 

Stir  well  with  spoon,  ornament  with  fruits  in  season  and 
serve  with  straws. 


WHISKEY   TODDY 

i  teaspoonful  sugar 
i  teaspoonful  water 
ioo%  of  whiskey. 

Dissolve    sugar    in    a    little   water,    add    the    whiskey,    stir 


with  spoon  and  serve. 


WHITE     HORSE 

(Use    large    glass.) 

2  dashes   Angostura   bitters 
i  piece  of  ice. 
Juice   h   orange 
50%  Scotch  whiskey 
1   bottle   of  ginger  ale. 

Stir  well   with   spoon   and    serve. 

(This  is  an  excellent   summer  drink.) 


WHITE    LION 

(Use  large  bar  glass,  half  full  of  ice.) 

1   teaspoonful  pulverized  sugar 
Juice   of    2   lime   or   lemon 
100%  Santa  Croix  rum 
3  dashes  Curacao 
3  dashes   raspberry. 

Shake  well,  strain  into  a  stem  glass  and  serve. 


WHITE   PLUSH 

50' !    rye   whiskey 

i^'/o   Maraschino 
1    fresh    egg 
Fill  glass  with  milk 
h  glass  cracked   ice. 

Shake   well  with   shaker,   strain   and   serve. 


WHITE     RAT 

75%   White  Absinthe 

25%  Anisette 

Fill  glass  with  fine  ice. 

Shake  and  strain,  fill  glass  with  carbonic. 


WIDOW'S    DREAM 

(Use    cocktail    glass.) 

100%   Benedictine 
1   fresh   egg. 

Fill  up  with  milk  and  cream  and  serve. 

WIDOW'S   KISS 

(Use   tumbler.) 

Yolk  of  1   egg 

1   teaspoonful  of  sugar 

100%  good  rye  whiskey 

Fill  glass  with  cracked  ice  and  shake  well  together. 

Fill  serving  glass  half  full  of  seltzer  then  strain  ingredi- 
ents slowly  on  top  and  serve. 

WASHINGTON    COCKTAIL 

1   dash  Angostura  bitters 
1  dash  of   Curacao 
90%   French   Vermouth 
10%  brandy 

Fill  glass   with    broken   ice. 
Stir,   strain  and   serve. 


WILLIAMS   COCKTAIL 

Juice  of  half  an  orange 
75%   dry  gin 
25%   Italian   Vermouth 
Fill  glass  with  broken  ice. 
Shake,  strain  and  serve. 


83 


ZABRISKIE 

i   dash   Boker's  bitters 
i   dash  Maraschino 
60%   dry  gin 
40%   Italian  Vermouth 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Stir,   strain   and   serve. 

ZAZA  COCKTAIL 

50^%   dry   gin 
50%Dnbonnet 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Stir   with    spoon,   strain.      Serve. 

ZAZARACK   COCKTAIL 

(Set   old-fashioned  glass  in   ice   for  three  minutes.) 
1  dash  of  Absintl;e 
100%  Bourbon  whiskey 
Quarter  loaf  of  sugar 
1   dash  of  Angostura  bitters 
Piece  broken    ice   in   glass. 
Stir,  strain  and  serve. 


JEREZ-QU1NA 


EXCELLENT     TONIC 


APPETIZER  &  FEBRIFUGE 


SHIPPED  BY 


..A.  VERGARA.. 


Jerez  de  la  Frontera,  Spain 


ESTABLISHED    1812 


84 


APPETIZERS 

There  have  been  many  ways  of  beginning  a  meal,  those 
which  obtain  in  our  day,  outside  of  oysters  and  clams  when 
in  season,  are  as  a  rule  made  up,  in  Winter,  of  caviar, 
anchovies,  tuny,  salmon  or  herring,  seasoned  highly,  served 
on  toast,  artichoke  bottom,  stuffed  into  small  scooped-out 
tomatoes  or  apples,  or  on  leaves  of  lettuce  and  romain. 
Fruits  such  as  oranges,  grape-fruit  or  pineapple  nicely  cooled 
are  also  frequently  used. 

In  Summer  the  fruits  above  in  combination  with  straw- 
berries, raspberries,  cantaloups,  and  fruit  juices  are  preferred, 
with    reason,    for    they    cool    instead    of    heating    the    system. 

A  very  good  and  novel  way  of  starting  a  lunch,  dinner 
or  supper  in  the  hot  days  for  those  who  cannot  use  fruit  or 
are  tired  of  canned,  smoked  or  salted  fish,  is  a  spoonful  of 
fresh  crab  meat,  nicely  seasoned,  served  in  a  small  glass 
with  two  or  three  small  leaves  of  lettuce,  the  small  glass 
placed  in  a  large  decorated  glass  filled  with  ice,  thereby 
keeping   the    crab    meat   nice   and    cold   till   used. 

CANAPE,  WHIMSAY 

Make  a  paste  composed  half  of  anchovies  and  half  of 
tuny  fish,  season  to  taste,  spread  upon  a  thin  square  piece 
of  fresh  toast,  glaze  thinly  with  tartar  sauce,  decorate  the 
sides  with  hashed  parsley,  green  pepper,  white  and  yolk  of 
eggs. 

SALAD,    DON    QUIXOTE 

Hashed  smoked  salmon,  anchovies,  white  and  yolk  of 
eggs,  shallots,  chives  and  beets;  seasoned  pepper,  paprika, 
oil  and  vinegar — place  a  spoonful  on  a  nice  leaf  of  lettuce, 
add  a  little  fresh  caviar  on  top,  serve  with  a  quarter  of 
lemon. 

SALMON   ON   TOAST 

Take  a  nice  fresh  piece  of  toast  of  the  desired  size, 
spread  over  it  a  slice  of  canned  smoked  salmon,  trim  nicely, 
sprinkle  with  bread  crumbs  and  grated  Parmesan  cheese,  add 
a  small  piece  of  fresh  butter  and  brown  in  a  gas  salamander. 

A  tuny  fish  salad  is  another  which,  when  made  daintily, 
is  both  appetizing  and  satisfying;  as  also  a  salad  made  of 
cold  boiled  salmon  or  sardines  wherein  radishes  onions, 
chives,  shallots,  etc.,  may  be  used  at  discretion.  But  enough; 
use  your  inventive  sense  and  the  number  becomes  unlimited. 

Yours, 

NESTOR  LATTARD. 


85 


APPETIZING    SANDWICHES 

CLUB  SANDWICH 

Thinly  sliced  Chicken,  broiled  ham  or  bacon,  with  lettuce 
leaves,  on   thin   slices  of  buttered  toast,  seasoned  to  taste. 

EGG    SANDWICH 

Take  yolk  of  hard  boiled  eggs,  adding  salt,  pepper,  mus- 
tard and  olive  oil,  making  paste,  and  spread  on  thin  slices  of 
bread. 

LETTUCE    MAYONNAISE    SANDWICH 

Spread  Mayonnaise  on  thin  slices  of  bread,  with  leaves 
of  lettuce. 

NUT    SANDWICH 

English  walnuts  chopped  up  fine,  with  Mayonnaise  dress- 
ing, on  thin  slices  of  bread. 

ROQUEFORT   CHEESE    SANDWICH 

Fresh  Roquefort  cheese,  with  thick  cream,  mixed  into  a 
paste  and  spread  on  thin  slices  of  buttered  bread. 

ANCHOVY   SANDWICH 

Pour  off  wine  and  wash  thoroughly  in  vinegar;  then  al- 
low them  to  stand  a  while  in  olive  oil,  after  which  drain 
and  open  lengthwise,  removing  bones,  and  place  on  unbut- 
tered  slices  of  bread. 

CAVIAR    SANDWICH 

Put  caviar  on  plate,  squeezing  juice  of  a  fresh  lemon 
on  it,  with  olive  oil  alternately;  beat  thoroughly  together  until 
paste  is  formed,  and  spread  on   thin   toast. 

CHEESE    STRAWS 

One-half  pound  flour,  one-quarter  pound  butter,  one-half 
pound  grated  Parmesan  cheese,  whites  of  two  eggs,  little  salt 
and  pepper  and  mustard  mixed  together;  roll  very  thin  and 
cut  in  strips  one-half  inch  wide,  four  inches  long;  bake  light 
brown. 

CHAMPAGNE   COBBLER 

y2  tablespoon  of  sugar 

i   slice  of  orange 

1  piece  of  lemon  peel. 

Fill  glass  one-third  full  of  fine  ice  and  fill  with  cham- 
pagne, dress  with  fruits  in  season.     Serve  with  straws. 

86 


CHAMPAGNE  COCKTAIL 

1  lump  of  sugar 

2  dashes  of  Angostura  bitters 
2  pt.  of  Ruinart  champagne. 

Stir  well  with   spoon,  twist  a  piece  of  lemon  peel  on  top 
and  serve. 

CHAMPAGNE   JULEP 

i   lump  of  sugar 

I    sprig  of  mint 

Fill  glass  with   champagne. 

Ornament  with  fruits  in  season  and  serve. 

FEDORA. 

i   teaspoonftil  of  sugar,  dissolved  in  a  little  water 

i   slice  of  lemon 

10%   brandy 

io%   Curacao 

60%   Bourbon  whiskey 

20%  Jamaica  rum. 

Fill   glass    with    broken    ice,    shake    well,    ornament   with 
fruits  in  season,  serve  with  straws. 

FOWLER  COCKTAIL 

Juice  of  half  an  orange 
75%   dry    gin 
26%   French  Vermouth 
5%   Italian  Vermouth 
Fill  glass  with  ice. 

Shake,  strain  and  serve. 

MAGNUS 

i  dash  Angostura  bitters 
Juice  of  •>"  orange 
Peel  of  an  orange  in  one  string- 
Place  in  glass 
50%   Gordon  dry  gin 
1    bottle   imported  ginger   ale 
Stir  and  serve. 

MAIDEN'S    DREAM 

1  pony  glass  Benedictine  of  Creme  de  Cocoa 
Fill  with  heavy  cream. 

This  drink  is  admired  by  ladies. 

MAMIE     TAYLOR 

Peel  of  lemon  in  one  string,  place  in  glass  so  it  hangs  over 

100%   applejack 

]/2  glass  with  cracked  ice. 

Bottle  of  imported  ginger  ale  and  serve. 

87 


o 
o 


m 


C/3 


-  2 

H 
ft 

2 


- 


Ruinart  Brut 


Oldest 


Champagne 

Mark  in  the  World 

House  Founded  in  1729 


The   Wine   of  the 

Connoisseurs 


To  be  had  at  all 


Hotels  and  Cafes 


Also 


HAIG  &  HAIG 


Distillers   since    1679'. 

Scots 
Whisky 

Sole  Agents 

Roosevelt   &    Schuyler 

NEW  YORK 


HIGH&DRY 
C1N 


BOOTHS 

The 
Original  Dry  Out 


\ 


Three  Products  of  Booth's  Distillery  in  London. 


HIGH  AND  DRY  GIN 

The  best  London  Dry  Gin, 
commands  the  highest 
price  in  London  and  is 
unsurpassed  for  Cocktails, 
Rickeys   and   Fizzes. 


FREUND,  BALLOR& COMPANY 

VERMOUTH 


TURIN,  ITALY 


BALLOR  VERMOUTH,  which  is  so  rapid- 
ly coming  into  favor  in  the  United 
States,  is  manufactured  by  the  house  of 
Freund,  Bailor  &  Company  of  Turin,  one  of 
the  leading  and  oldest  firms  in  the  Vermouth 
industry  of  Italy.  Bailor  Vermouth  has  for 
a  basis  a  very  choice  wine  and  derives  its 
flavor  and  tonic  properties  from  the  infusion 
of  various  herbs  growing  on  the  Alps.  This 
Vermouth,  is  unexcelled  for  all  mixed  drinks 
in  which  Vermouth  is  used,  retaining  its 
natural  brilliancy  when  mixed  with  Gin, 
Whisky,  Brandy,  etc.  Bailor  Vermouth  is 
|  supplied  to  the  Royal  House  of  Italy,  its 
manufacturers  having  been  appointed  pur- 
veyors to  the  King  many  years  ago,  and  has 
been  awarded  the  highest  distinctions  at  all 
reat  International  Expositions,  beginning 
with  that  of  London  in  1862,  to  the  latest 
Paris  Exposition,  at  which  it  obtained  a  gold 
medal — the  highest  prize  accorded  to  Ver- 
mouth. Twelve  Diplomas  of  honor  and  four- 
teen gold  medals  are  included  in  its  list  of 
exhibition   awards. 

The  establishment  of  Freund,  Bailor  &  Co. 
covers  an  area  of  about  eight  acres,  and  is 
one  of  the  largest  in  Italy.  The  cellars  con- 
tain a  stock  of  about  800,000  gallons,  and 
the  Vermouth  is  never  put  on  the  market 
before   it   is   at   least   two  or   three   years   old. 

This  Vermouth  is  shipped  in  cases  of  one 
dozen  bottles  each,  and  in  casks  of  various 
sizes,  from  twenty  to  one  hundred  and  sixty 
gallons    each. 


SOLE  AGENTS: 


G,  S.  Nicholas  &  Co 

41    and   43    BEAVER    STREET,    NEW    YORK. 


/     / 


Benedictine 


the  best 
after-dinner 


Cordial 


NOILLY  PRAT  &  CO. 


THE 

ORIGINAL    and    BEST 

DRY   FRENCH 

VERMOUTH 


UNEQUALED        FOR       COCKTAILS 


Gold  Seal 

Champagne 

URBANA  WINE  CO.,  Sole  Makers,  Urbana,  N.  Y. 


AMERICA'S  BEST 

Equal   to   the 

Choicest    Imported    Brands. 


Fermented    in    the    Bottle 
by  the  French  Process. 

Why  Pay  Import  Duties? 


For  Sale  by  all  Leading 
Dealers.  Served  at  all  First 
Class  Hotels,  Restaurants, 
Cafes,  Clubs,  etc. 


Edward    S.     cTVlcGrath 


General   Representative 


36  Whitehall   Street 


New  York 


grclio 


The  Standard 
Chianti  Wine 


Imported  in  sealed  cases 
from  Baron  Ricasoli's 
Brolio  Castle  famous 
cellars  in  the   Chianti 
district  {Tuscany) 


Sole  Agent  for  U.  S.  and  Canada 

EMILIO  PERERA,  1 1  B'way,  New  York 


If  you  want 

The  Best  that  Belfast 
Produces'' 


ask  for 


ROSS'S 


At  the 
Leading 
Hotels,  Cafes, 
Clubs  and  on 
Steamship  Lines 


GINGER 
ALE 


|}lacK 


SCOTCH 


&WHITE 


^\ 


WHISKY 


lsAtiRl6HT 


James  Buchanan 
&Co. 


29   BROADWAY 
NEW  YORK 


"Crabbie" 

Highland 
Scotch  Whisky 

has  impressed  the  discriminating"  Consumer  as  being  per- 
fect. It  is  unsurpassed  in  delicacy  of  flavor,  of  great  age 
and  mellowness,  and  is  assuredly  second  to  none  in  the 
market  for  excellence.  Try  a  case  from  your  Wine  Mer- 
chant,  Grocer  or  the   Distributing  Agent. 

F.  C.  WERNIG 

51     STONE     STREET,     NEW     YORK     CITY 

MR.  WERNIG  invites  the  attention  of  connoisseurs  and 
collectors  to  the  stock  of  rare  old  Sherries,  Ports,  Madeiras, 
Brandies,  etc.,  in  his  cellars  and  to  his  selection  of  choice 
Vintage    Chateau   bottled   Clarets   and  Vintage   Champagnes. 

F.  CHAUVENET 

(NUITS,  COTE-D'OR), 
FRANCE. 

Burgundy  Wines 

OF  SUPERIOR  QUALITY. 

ROMANEE,  NUITS, 

CLOS-DE-VOUGEOT,         VOLNAY, 

CHAMBERTIN,  POMMARD, 

BEAUNE,  BEAUJOLAIS,  MACON. 

Sparkling  Burgundies 

"WHITE  CAP,"  Ultra  Sec. 
"RED  CAP."      "PINK  CAP,"   Oeil   de   Perdrix. 

H.  P.  FINLAY  &   COMPANY,   Ltd. 


CHAPPAZ 

Dry"  French  Vermouth 


The  "Best 

French 

Vermouth 

Imported 


Unexcelled  for 
Cocktails  and  a 
delicious  drink 
plain  or  %ith 
sparkling  Waters 


L.  ARDIN 

121-123  W*  26th  Street 
New  York 

Sole  Agent  for  the  United  States  and  Canada 


GORDON    &    CO. 


Established  1709 

Distillery,  132  Goswell  Road 


LONDON,  E.  C. 


DRY  GIN 


MADE  IN  ENGLAND 


Facsimile  of  Bottles  and  Labels 

The  Gordon  Gin  makes  a  delicious 
Cocktail,  Fizz  and  Rickey,  also  a  very 
refreshing  drink  with  plain  soda* 

E.  LA  MONTAGNE'S   SONS 


Sole  Agents 


45  Beaver  Street 


New  York 


ITALIAN  WINES 


ACHILLE    STARACE 

Sole  Agent  in  the  United  States 

—ALSO— 

IMPORTER  OF  PURE  OLIVE  OIL 

"Star  of  Italy"  Brand 

32  BROADWAY        .....       NEW  YORK 


AMER  PICON 


What  it  is 
and  How 
to  Use  it 


acquired 


AMER    PICON 

is  a  pleasant  and  perfect 
invigorator  extracted 
from  plants  grown  in  Al- 
geria, where  it  is  ex- 
tensively used  by  the 
colonists  to  counteract 
the  debilitating  influences 
of  the  climate, 
mmense   popularity   in    France   and    through- 


out 


It  has   since 
the    world. 

In  Paris  alone,  where  the  public  is  offered  so  many  appetizers  and 
tonics  and  where  the  competition  is  so  keen,  Amer  Picon  has  superseded 
all  its  competitors  and  its  consumption  has  attained  1,500,000  bottles  annu- 
ally.     The  total   annual   consumption   of  Amer    Picon   is    12,000,000   bottles. 

<;Use  a   large   size   fizz    glass.)      Mix    as 
follows:     2    or   3   lumps  of  clear  crystal 
ice,    1    wine-glass    Amer    Picon,    1    tablespoonful    of    Curacao    or   Grenadine. 
Fill   glass   with   ice-cold   syphon    or   plain   water. 

Lump    ice,    1-3    wine-glass    Italian    Ver- 
mouth,   2-3   wine-glass  Amer  Picon.     Stir 
well   with    a   spoon,    strain   into   a    cocktail    glass,    and  serve. 


PICON  HIGHBALL 


PICON  COCKTAIL 


GREEN  RIVER 

THE    WHISKEY 
WITHOUT    A     HEADACHE 


CESARE    CONT 


SOLE    AGENT 


Also  for  ROBBIE  BURNS  SCOTCH  WHISKEY 
and  Famous  DUBLIN  CLUB  IRISH  WHISKEY 

35   Broadway,   New  York 


PESSAGNO  & 
MONTRESOR 

IMPORTERS 

Distributors  of  the  Celebrated 

GANCIA'S 

Italian 

Sparkling 
Wines 

557    WEST   BROADWAY 
NEW    YORK 


VALPOLICE1 


VALPOLICELLA 
SPUM ANTE 

ONE    OF    THE    BEST 

Natural 

Sparkling 

Wines 

RED  AND  WHITE 

PRODUCED    IN    ITALY 
Imported  by 

PESSAGNO  &  MONTRESOR 

557  West  Broadway  New  York 


BYRRH  WINE 


THE 

ORIGINAL 

AND 

GREATEST 

FRENCH 

APPETIZER 


BYRRH 
WINE 

makes  a  most 

delicious 

HIGH    BALL 


BYRRH  WINE= 

is  an  appetizer  par  excellence.  It  can  be  taken  at 
any  time  and  stimulates  the  desire  for  food  as  no 
other  beverage  does.  It  is  Agreeable,  Pleasant  and 
Beneficial.  Among  Connoisseurs  and  Particular  Peo- 
ple it  invariably  supplants  the  Cocktail. 

VIOLET  FRBKES,   THUIR,  FRANCE 

R.    B.     HENRY     COMPANY 

Sole  Agents  for  U.  S. 


Ill   &  113  HUDSON  STREET 


NEW  YORK. 


l>een 
lied 
rs 


for65yea 


Sold  at  first-class  Hotels,  Restaurants,  Clubs,  Cafes,  Etc. 

THE  OLDEST  LAGER  BEER  BREWERY 
IN   THE    UNITED  STATES 


Sole  Importers  of 

COBURGER 

Coburger    Bierbrauerei    A.  G.,  Coburg,  Thneringen. 

PILSENER 

Bnrgerliches    Brauhaus,        Leitmeritz,        Boehmen. 

MUNCHNER  KINDL 

Unions  Brauerei,  Schuelein  &  Go.  Munchen,  Baiern. 

R.  NAEGELI'S  SONS 

HOBOKEN,   N.  J. 


Bottle  Beer  Orders  for  Hotel,   Club   and'Family  Trade 
Promptly  Attended  to. 


A  DELICIOUS 
APPETIZER 


Roosevelt  &  Schuyler 

Sole    Agents 


FEB 


One  copy  del.  to  Cat.  Div. 


BfiAft    4 


