'·               ···-'-'·      -.i
                               . ·«- "r

:OCKTAILS

           ;;,! ··VsJf'I'V
           ' ·'  1'' !l. Kl'V

    '' ·· J · · · -J, ^' ···' '"j ·V>-' *« ·

· .. c . : v;.'!-

          ' ! i" ''· L' V'»-

                        . · f,'l" 'i.'- ' :1.. ' "· . " '·' ' ' *

        Ms

^liristopker fir* Go;.

                     X'MALl.

                         ·f ·. \
               .A

               , ·' »        I

                     ..K,*, ·'**N . , .
                             ·: 4

                   ..·Ifv .!,,, , <·' 2

                       '·»<

·> iVi-^ i' ·
        APERITIFS

                              ·=^<=

^HRISTOPHER & CO. have much

       pleasure in presenting those of their
 Customers who prefer Cocktails to the old-

 fashioned custom of a glass of Dry Sherry
 before meals, with a booklet containing a
 large number of recipes for Cocktails, com
 piled by a well-known expert in mixing these

, drinks.

    Notwithstanding the modern popularity
 for Cocktails, Christopher & Co. remain
 stubborn in their opinion begotten of over
 one hundred years' experience as Wine Mer
 chants, that a glass of Fine Dry Sherry is
 undoubtedly the best and most wholesome

 appetiser.
                                          BY APPOINTMENT

  WINE MERCHANTS

                             TO H.M. THE KING

         If'VjiSiiif "''i jl

Chnstoplier &Co.

Orvieto, 43 PALL MALL

           LONDON, S.W.I grrt'egTIt
                     IW*

snl
                                                   BY APPOINTMENT

Mn

  PERRIER-JOUET & CO.

Sii)

      EPERNAY                                                         ard
                                                                      [L'K

                                                                      Sh

i                                                                  .
'an!
i     WERE THE FIRST

S     FIRM TO SHIP

                DRY

      champagne
    "Harry" of Giro's

V.  ABC

    of

    Mixing Cocktails

             Specially Printed
                          for

    CHRISTOPHER & Co. Ltd.
                            by

    DEAN & SON LTD., London
 RUBAIYAT of OMAR KHAYYAM.

                                        LXI.

     " I often wonder wlmt the Vintners buy.

      One half so precious as the goods they sell.

«e are largely indebted to Mr. Andr6 I,. Simon for the
following abridged articles on the Production of Wines.

                                            T-
                         CLARETS.

The wine we call " Claret " is, or should be, the
exclusive produce of the Dfepartenient of the Gironde.

The vineyards of the Gironde may be divided into
six principal categories, namely :

   1. Medoc. a strip of land some fifty miles long
by six miles wide, lying on the south bank of the
River Gironde. This district produces the "cele
brated wines of Chat. Margaux, Chat. Lafite, Chat.

Latour, etc.

   2. Graves. A small district lying just outside
Bordeaux extending some twenty kilometres to the
west of that city. This district is chiefly renowned
in England for its white wines, but it is not so
generally known that it produces a much larger
quantity of red wines, such as, for instance, the

celebrated Chat. Haut Brion.

    3. Sauternes and Barsac. A small district
south of the Graves, on the south bank of the

River Gironde. This district owes its fame entirely
to its fine white wines, the most celebrated of which
is Chat. Y'Quem.

   4. Entre-deux-mers. a district comprised
between the River Dordogne on the north, and the
River Gironde on the south, lying in the Departe-
ment of the Gironde. Produces sound, useful

wines.

   5. St. Emilion and Pomerol. A hilly district
north of the River Dordogne in the Arrondissement

                                                                     VII.
o£ Libourne. This district produces wines of a
more generous character than the Mddoc. They
are often called the Burgundies of the Gironde.

    6. Cotes and Palus. The Cotes wines are those

from hillside vineyards in different parts of the

Ddpartement of the Gironde, and the Palus wines
are those obtained from vines planted in rich

alluvial soil adjacent to the banks of the Gironde,

Garonne, or Dordogne.

    Clarets are the most natural wines made, and owe

nothing to any artificial aids to improve the wine.
The colour, body, flavour, and alcoholic strength
are all due to the species of grapes used in making
the wine, to the nature of the soil, the aspect of the

vineyards where such grapes arc grown, and the

natural fermentation of the wine.

   As soon as the grapes are ripe they arc carefully
picked, and all unsound berries removed. After
being pressed the juice of the grape is left to ferment
in large wooden tubs, whence after a short time the

wine is withdrawn into hogsheads.

   Development proceeds naturally for two or three
years, and the wine is occasionally " racked," or
drawn off into fresh hogsheads.

   The wine is then put into bottle, and will continue
to improve in bottle for a length of time dependent
on the quality of the wine and the characteristics
of the particular vintage when it was produced.
                         BURGUNDY.

The ancient province of Burgundy is now repre

sented chiefly by the Departement of the Cote D'Or
the S6ane-et-Loire, and the Yonne.

   The finest Burgundy vineyards are in the Cote
D'Or, which extends for about thirty-six miles
south from Dijon to Santenay, and includes such
famous names as Chambertin, Musigny, CIos de
Vougeot, Romanfe Conti, Richebourg, Nuits St.
George, etc., also the well-known names of Beaune,

Pommard, Volnay, etc. Situated also in the
Cote D'Or are the famous Montrachet vineyards,
which produce one of the finest white wines of
France. Good White Burgundy is also made from
the vineyards of Meursault.

    To the north-west of the Cote D'Or, at a distance
of some ninety miles, the Departement of Yonne
produces the celebrated white wines of Chablis.

     The best red wines of Saone-et-Loire are those

of Macon, and the best white wines those of Pouilly.
    Further south are the vinej'ards which produce

the wines of Beaujolais.
    Still further south are the vineyards producing

 the wines of Hermitage.
                                                 PORTS.

                No wine has any right to bo called " Port " unless it
                fulfils the three conditions laid down by the Portu
                guese Law of 1915, namely : i. A fortified wine.
                2. Produced in the Douro region as demarcated by
                law. 3. Exported over the Bar of Oporto.

                   In the preparation of Port, after the grapes are
                picked and pressed the resulting grape juice is in a
                state of fermentation, but this is only allowed to

                continue to a limited extent, when it is checked
                by the incorporation of Brandy distilled from wine

                of the country. The result is wine of which such
                Brandy has become an inherent ingredient.

                   During the spring following the vintage the newly

                made wines are sent down the River Douro to

                Oporto, where they are stored in warehouses or
                lodges.

                   If of sufficient body, flavour and quality, the
                wine is shipped to England as " Vintage " Port
                about two years after the vintage, to be bottled
                and laid down soon after arrival by the wine
                merchant for consumption several years afterwards.

                   In years other than " Vintage " years the wine
                remains stored in cask in the lodges at Oporto.
                It develops much more rapidly in cask, gradually
                loses colour, is refreshed from time to time with

                wine kept in reserve for that purpose, and is finally
                shipped as " Tawny " or " Ruby " Port from the

                wood, as the case may be.

fcl" · nWii 'r  .
                             SHERRY.

Sherry as known in England is a blended wine in
the sense that it is ravely shipped as a single vintage
wine, and perhaps in no other wine has the science
o£ blending been carried to a higher state of per

fection.

   Shipments are prepared according to the parti
cular requirements of customers by blending wines

from different " Soleras."

    " Soleras " are standardised wines of different

types, but kept absolutely uniform in their various
styles from year to year. They are kept in the
Bodegas at Jerez, in the south of Spain, and form
the foundation on which the shipper makes his
blends for export. As he draws on them, so he
replenishes them year by year, and in doing so it is
vital to his business to preserve continuity of style
and quality in his various " Soleras."

    It will thus be seen that " Soleras " are themselves

the result of highly scientific and judicious blending
year by year from carefully selected wines of
various vintages reserved by the shippers for that

purpose.

   At vintage time, which is generally in September,
the grapes are picked and crushed. Fermentation
sets in, and when completed the young wine is

drawn off into fresh casks. Some few months after

the vintage the young wine will fall bright, when
expert tasters diagnose the characteristics of the
different casks and apportion the necessary amount
of Brandy to each cask. The wine is then left to
mature in the Bodegas. The several casks will
produce marked differences in their characteristics,
and it is upon the scientific blending of the various
styles of wines thus produced that the shippers
depend for the upkeep of their " Soleras."

   The three principal classes of fine Sherry are the
Fino, a pa.le, delicate wine, the Amontillado, and the

Oloroso, a full, dark wine.
   Brown Sherry is the result of adding a wine

called " Pedro Ximenez," which is made from

grapes dried in the sun until they become raisins,
thereby producing a dark, luscious wine.

   Manzanilla is a type of light dry wine produced
some short distance from Jerez, and more suitable

for hot climates than the northern latitudes in

which England lies.
                       CHAMPAGNES.

One of the many interesting features of Champagne
is that although a white wine it is made largely from
black grapes. The grapes are pressed as soon as
they are picked, in such a way as to separate the
juice from the skins, which latter contain the
colouring matter, and the juice is immediately run
off into large fermenting vats, and thence into casks.

   Fermentation begins at once, and transforms the
sugar of the grape juice into alcohol and carbonic
acid gas. The result is the alcohol remains in the
wine, while the carbonic acid gas loses itself in the
air. To retain part of this carbonic acid gas in the

wine is the chief feature of the art of making
" Sparkling Wine." This is effected by bottling the
wine at an early date, namely in the springtime
following the vintage. Fermentation continues
within the bottle, and as the carbonic acid gas is
unable to escape, it remains in solution with the
wine and renders it " Sparkling."

    There is thus caused a certain amount of sediment

in the wine, which is removed by stacking the

bottles neck downwards, which are shaken daily
for some two months or so, when the time comes to
operate the wine for export, until the whole of the
deposit settles on the cork. The deposit is sub
sequently ejected from the bottle, and the necessary
sweetening matter, namely a small quantity of
candy sugar dissolved in Champagne of the best
quality, is added. This process is called " dis
gorging." One method of doing so is by a process
of freezing the deposit to the cork and removing the

cork and sediment in one frozen unit.

   A new cork is then placed in the bottle, and the
Champagne is ready for consumption.
                    EMPIRE WINES.

The present Government proposals with regard to
the substantial Duty concessions on Empire wines
will, if carried into effect, be welcomed by all

concerned in the wine trade and should lead to a
great increase in the trade done in this direction.

   The wines of Australia are full bodied, generous
wines, chiefly of the heavier European types, and
pe produced principally in Victoria, near Adelaide,
in South Australia, and on the River Hunter, in
tlie province of New South Wales. The climate
and soil in these districts are admirably suited to
the growth of vines and the production of vast
quantities of grapes, but it would appear doubtful
whether her wines can be considered comparable
to the finest products of France, owing to th'e
richness of the soil and the strength of the sun,
which produces an excess of sugar in the grape.

   The most famous of the Cape wines are produced
at Constantia, in the neighbourhood of Cape Town.
The next best wines of South Arica are those
produced near Stellenbosch, Somerset West, Cale-
don, etc. The vines cultivated in South Africa were
originally the same as those in use on the Rhine,
at Jerez, at the Hermitage, and in the Medoc, but
the differences of soil and climate are such as to
produce virtually different wines.

                                                                     XIV.
                               BRANDY.

Brandy is a spirit obtained by the distillation of
wine. The name signifies in its origin " burnt "
wine. All Brandies are, or should be, grape spirits,
and undoubtedly the finest Brandies procurable
are those of Cognac.

   Cognac is the name of a small town on the River

Charente, in the south of France, and the only
Brandy entitled to the name of Cognac is that
distilled from the wines grown within a limited
district known as the " Region Delimitee." This

region comprises the two Charentes, a small area
of Deux-Sevres, and of Dordogne. The two
Charentes are divided into five districts, namely
Grande Champagne, Petite Champagne, Borderies,
Fins Bois, and Bois Eloignes.

   Some good Brandy known as Armagnac is also

made in the Departement of Gers.
   A special kind of vine is grown in the " Region

Delimitee," producing a light white wine which
lends itself for distillation into Brandy of far
greater delicacy than that produced in regions where

the wine is fuller-bodied.
    All Brandies when fresh from the still are clear,

colourless liquids. After remaining for some years
in special oak casks, however, they gradually
develop a pale amber tint which is acquired from

the wood.
    Brown Brandies owe their colour to the addition

of burnt sugar.

                                                               XV.
                   Treatment of Wines.

     Binning, Decanting and Serving.

                               Binning.

All fine wines, old wines particularly so, need a
rest after a journey, and require to settle down
before being consumed. If this is not practicable,
the bottles should be stood up for at least 24 hours
before being decanted.

   All wines should be unpacked and binned away
in cellars of a uniform temperature, if possible,
of 50° to 60° Fahr. An even temperature is of
the highest importance, as variations of tempera
ture, excessive heat, or excessive cold are injurious

to wine.

   The bottles should be placed in the bins with
their necks inclined a little downwards to ensure
the corks being kept moist by the wine. Otherwise
the corks will contract and the wine will suffer
by contact with the air and become valueless.

    Ports should be binned away with chalk mark

uppermost. Other wines with chalk mark or
 labels uppermost as the case may be.

    Champagnes, Graves, Sauternes, Hocks and
 Moselles should be kept in the coolest, and Clarets,
 Burgundies and Ports in the warmest part of the

 cellar.

    All sparkling wines should be kept laid down

 wherever stored for however short a time.
                               Decanting.

   All still wines throw a deposit if kept long in

 bottle, and care should therefore be exercised in
decanting them. This deposit varies from the
heavy deposit or crust thrown by Vintage Ports to
the fine sediment thrown by Clarets and Burgundies,
which make the latter particularly difficult to decant

as the sediment being extremely fine is not easy
to detect, and having a bitter flavour will spoil
the delicacy of the wine if allowed to pass into

 the decanter.

    Ordinary Port from the wood, will throw a fine
sediment if kept too long in bottle before use, and

if not decanted will, though otherwise quite sound,
appear dull and cloudy when served. Sherry will
also throw a deposit if kept for any length of time

in bottle.

    Vintage Ports will show all the better if decanted
about eight hours before dinner, and old bottled
Clarets improve greatly if decanted one or two

hours before dinner and the stopper removed from

the decanter to allow the wine to breathe.

   Vintage Port should be decanted at the bin in

the cellar.'

   Fine Claret to acquire the proper temperature
should be stood up in the dining room the morning

it is to be consumed and should be decanted as

above mentioned. This is far preferable to warming

the decanter.

   All wines should be decanted keeping the bottle
in a nearly horizontal position with the same side

uppermost as in the bin, and it is best done in front
of a lighted candle.

   Except by experts, vintage Port, fine Claret
and Burgundy should be decanted through very
fine clean muslin, and care be taken to stop the
operation directly any of the sediment or crust
appears in the wine passing through the neck of
the bottle, which should on no account be allowed
to pass into the decanter, as otherwise the presence
of any of the sediment in the decanter will destroy
the delicacy and flavour of the wine. A decanting
funnel is recommended for decanting good wines.

   It should be remembered that many a good bottle
of wine has been spoilt by neglect to wipe the lip
and neck of the bottle before decanting, or by

neglect to use a clean decanter, clean muslin or a

clean strainer.

   With regard to decanting very old wines, such
as old vintage Ports, it is best to remove the neck
of the bottle below the cork with a pair of tongs
which are supplied for this purpose. The tongs
are heated and the neck of the bottle gripped just
below the cork. On removing the tongs apply

 to the neck of the bottle where the tongs have held

it a piece of rag dipped in cold water. The neck
will then come off easily and cleanly.

                                  Serving.

    Never serve wines, particularly Claret, Burgundy
 or Port, in a decanting basket. It should always
 be decanted. No wine should be served that is
 defective or " corky " (a term used to indicate
 wine that has been tainted and gives forth a smell,
 however slight, of a bad cork).

    Fine wine deserves fine glass. Serve in large
 thin glasses and only two-thirds filled. To con
 noisseurs the bouquet is as attractive as the flavour.

    Champagne is often served too cold. The bottle
 should be put in an ice bucket for not longer than
twenty minutes before use. Never put ice in the
wine. When opening Champagne remove all

wire and foil before drawing the cork, and wipe

the lip of the bottle, otherwise the wine will be
tainted by running over the dirty wire, etc.

   French white still wines, such as Graves, Sau-
ternes and Barsac and German Moselles willimprove
greatly by being put on ice in the same way as
Champagne.

              .· .
vnnir
   CIA5S

A.D. loSO

James Powell & Sons           Ltd.

'Condon's Oldest OlassmaKers

SUPPLY THE CHOICEST HAND MADE AND HAND CUT

GLASS IN EARLY i8tH CENTURY PATTERNS, AND

MANY OTHER EXCLUSIVE AND ORIGINAL DESIGNS.

 Shoivrooms--98-IOO Vy'igmore dV., hOO^DON^ ^y.l.
            YOUR GLASS OF WINE.

As lately as 1920 the moderate wine-drinker

the United States was laughing at the idea of ^

dry America." But Prohibition has come, ana

his glass of good wine has gone.

   YOUR glass of wine will go too if you do not

defend it.

   HELP yourself. The citizen, not the trade, can

win this fight.

   Watch your elections, and rouse up your fellow-
electors. Few candidates risk standing openly as
Prohibitionists ; but, cloaked as Local Optionists,
as Nationalists, as State-Purchasers or merely as
" Temperance Reformers," they are already busy

sapping your liberties.

   Keep teetotal tyrants out of Parliament and out
of your Borough and County Councils. If they
are already in, work to turn them out at the next

elections. Faddists are not the men to be entrusted
with the direction of public affairs and with the
spending of taxpayers' and ratepayers' money.

   England,-say the American intruders, is to be
made dry by the women's vote. Find out what
they are telling your womenfolk, and explain to

them the other side.

   Prohibition means more taxes, more drug-
taking, more discontent.
 Results of Prohibition in U.S.A. 1923.

 The late President Harding, in his Annual Message
to Congress on December 8th, 1922, summed up the
existing conditions in these words : " In plain
speaking, there arc conditions relating to its enforce

 ment which savour of nation-wide scandal. It is

the most demoralising factor in our public life.
Most of the people assume that the adoption of the

Eighteenth Amendment meant the elimination of
the qiiestion from our politics. On the contrary,
it has been so intensified as an issue that many
voters are dispo.sed to make all political decisions
with reference to this single question."

    Dr. Angell, President of Yale University, declared
in his address to the graduating students last year
that " the violation of law has never been so general
nor so widely condoTicd as at present."

    Justice Clarke, of the United States Supreme
Court, addres.^ing the students of the New York
University Law School, said : " The Eighteenth
Amendment required millions of men and women to
abruptly give up habits and customs of life which
they thought not immoral or wrong, but which, on
the contrary, they believed to be nece.ssary to tlieir
reasonable comfort and hapi^jiness, and thereby,
as we all now sec, respect not only for that law, but
for all law, has been put to an unprecedented and
demoralising strain in our country, the end of which

it is difficult to see."

   Dr. Nicholas Murray Butler, President of

Columbia University, in an address delivered before
the Ohio State Bar Association last January, made
the assertion : " That disregard ofJaw, disobedience
to law, and contempt for law have greatly increased
and arc still increasing in this countrj' is not to
be doubted. . . . It is rather a sorry outcome of our

century and a half of existence as an independent
nation, proclaiming to the world the discovery of
the best possible method of providing for liberty
under law, that we should now be pointed to as the
law-breaking nation par excellence."
r

       '^he Best Cocf^tail

           CHRISTOPHER'S
                     PALE
                      DRY

                   SHERRY

                                Best Cocf^tail
 1. Absinthe Cocktail.

   j Absinthe, J Gin, J Syrup of Anisette or Syrup
of Gomme, add one dash Orange, ' one dash

 Angostura.
    Shake until frozen, and strain into cocktail glass.

2. Absinthe Frappe.

   f Absinthe, J Syrup of Anisette, double quantity

of water.

   Shake up long enough until the outside of the
shaker is thoroughly covered with ice. Strain into

small tumbler.

3. Adonis Cocktail.

   I dash Orange Bitters, i Sherry, f Italian

Vermouth.

4. American Beauty.
   This is a long drink, use tumbler, i teaspoon-

ful of Creme de Menthe. Fill with ice. Then in

another glass mix the following : i Orange juice
J Grenadine, J French Vermouth, J Cognac. Pour
in first glass. Dash the top with Port Wine, dress
with fruits and a sprig of fresh mint, and serve with

a straw.

5. Apple Jack Cocktail.
   5 Apple Jack, i Grenadine, J Lemon Juice.

6. Alaska Cocktail.
      Yellow Chartreuse, J Gin (Gordon).

7. Astoria Cocktail.

   I dash Orange Bitters, § Gin, J French Vermouth.

   Serve with stuffed Olive.

                                                     15
 8. Angel's Kiss.
   Pour into liqueur glass J Cr^me de Cacao, 

 Fresh Cream.
9. Alexander Cocktail.

   J Cr6me de Cacao, J Brandy, J Fresh Cream.
   Shake welland strain into cocktail glass.

10. Alfonso Cocktail.

   Put one lump of sugar in a medium-sized wine

glass, 2 dashes of Secrestat Bitter poured on to the
        one lump of ice, one quarter of the glass

Dubonnet", and fill remainder with Champagne,
and squeeze lemon peel on top, and stir slightly.
i.n P1n9e22a,bodvuericnogckhtiasilMwaasjevsetyrytphoepuKlainrgatoDf cSapuaviinll'es
stay at that popular Normandy resort.

                                                  16
11. Bronx Cocktail.

  J Gin, ^ French Vermouth, J Italian Vermouth,
the juice of a quarter of an Orange.

12. Bloodhound Cocktail.

  J Gin, J French Vermouth, J Italian Vermouth,

2 or 3 Strawberries. Shake well, and strain.

   (This cocktail was introduced to London by the

Duke of Manchester a few years ago.)

13. Broken Spur Cocktail.

   I yolk of a Fresh Egg, I- Gin, J Italian Vermouth,
f White Port, i teaspoonful Anisette Marie Brisard.

   (This cocktail was brought out by the cavalry
which got disbanded during the war.)

14. Brooklyn Cocktail.
    I dash Amcr. Picon, i dash of Maraschino,

§· Rye Whisky, J French Vermouth.

 15. Brazil Cocktail.

   3 dashes Angostura, 3 dashes Absinthe, i French

 Vermouth, 4 Sherry.

   Stir up well, strain into cocktail glass, adding a
cherry, and squeeze a piece of lemon peel on top.

 16. Blackthorn Cocktail.

   3 dashes Angostura, 3 dashes Absinthe, J Irish

 Whisky, French Vermouth.
    Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass.

 17. Bossom Caresser.

   I yolk of Egg, I teaspoonful of Grenadine, J

 Curasao, J Brandy, J Maddre.

     Shake well. Strain.

                                                        17
 18. Bronx Terrace Cocktail.

    f Gin, J French Vermouth, Juice of half a Lime.

 19. Brut Cocktail.

    I dash Angostura Bitters, J Amer. Picon,

 t French Vermouth.

20. Byrrh Cocktail.

   i French Vermouth, J Rye Whisky, J Byrrh.
   Byrrh is something similar to Dubonnet but

much more dry to the taste.

21. Bunny's Hug.
   i Gin, J Scotch Whisky, J Absinthe.

22. Bacardi Cocktail

   1 teaspoonful Grenadine, J Gin, J Bacardi Rum,

Juice of half a Lime.

   (Bacardi Rum comes from Cuba.)

23. Brandy Cocktail.
   2 da,shes Angostura, 2 teaspoonful of Gomme

Syrup, I glass Brandy.

24. Bijou Cocktail.
   Use a large bar glass.

   I dash Orange Bitters, J Green Chartreuse, i
Italian Vermouth, J Plymouth Gin,

   Mix well with a spoon, strain into a cocktail

glass, add a cherry or olive, squeeze a piece of

lemon peel on top, and serve,

  (Recipe from Harry Johnson of New Orleans.)

                                                    18
25. Bamboo Cocktail.

   I dash Orange Bitters, ^ wineglass Dry Sherry,
J wineglass French Vermouth.

  {Charlie Mahoney, Bar-tender, Hoffman House,

New York.)

26. Brandy Daisy.

  J Brandy, J Syrup of Grenadine, Juice of haff

a Lemon.

   Shake well, strain, pour into double-sized cock
tail glass, add cherry and other fruit in season and
a squirt of soda water.

27. Brandy Flip.

   I yolk of a Fresh Egg, i teaspoonful Sugar or
Syrup Gomnie, f Brandy.

    Shake well, strain into small wineglass, and grate
a little nutmeg on top.

28. Brandy Smash.

   Dissolve I teaspoonful of Sugar and water in a
shaker, add a few sprigs of Fresh Mint, Extract
Flavour of Mint. Draw out sprigs of Mint, add
one glass of Brandy, shake well, and pour into
wineglass half full fine ice. Decorate with fruits

in season.

29. Brandy Sour.

   I teaspoonful Sugar or Gomme Syrup, Juice of

half a Lemon, i glass Brandy.
   Shake well, strain into wineglass, squirt a little

syphon on top, decorate with fruit.

                                                        19
30. Brandy Crustas.
   Take a small wineglass, moisten the rim with

lernon, dip rim of glass into castor sugar, which
action gives the glass a frosted appearance. Cut
the rind of a half a lemon the same as you would
peel an apple, then fit into your prepared glass.
Then pour into your shaker i tcaspoonful Sugar
or Gomme Syrup, 3 dashes of Maraschino, 3 dashes
of Angostura Bitters, Juice of a J Lemon, i glass
Brandy. Shake well, pour into your glass, and

add fruit.

31. Brandy Fix.

  Pour into a small tumbler i teaspoonful of Sugar,
I teaspoonful of Water to dissolve the sugar. Juice
of a half Lemon, liqueur of Cherry Brandy,

I liqueur of Brandy.
   Fill the glass with fine ice and stir slowly, then

add a slice of Lemon, and serve with a straw.

32. Brandy Julip.
   Same as Mint Julip.

33. Bull-Dog.

   Put 2 or 3 lumps of Ice in a large tumbler, add
the Juice of i Orange, i glass of Gin. Fill balance
with Ginger Ale. Stir, and serve with a straw.

34. Brandy Highball is Brandy and Soda, i
piece of Lemon Peel squeezed in glass, with a chunk

of Ice.

35. Bromo Seltzer.

  In a large tumbler. Put one tablespoonful of
Bromq Seltzer (which canbeprocured at allchemists)

fill with Soda, then pour into another tumbler.
Repeat this twice until powder is dissolved, and

drink while fizzing. (A good pick-me-up for that

next morning feeling).
36. Cameron's Kick Cocktail.

   1 Scotch Whisky, J Irish Whisky, J Lemon
Juice, J Orgeat Syrup.

   (Orgeat Syrup is manufactured from almonds.)

37. Canadian Cocktail.

   2 dashes Angostura, 2 teaspoonfuls of Gomme
Syrup, I glass of Canadian Club Whisky.

38. Casino Cocktail.

   In a wineglass put i lump of Sugar, soak it with
Absinthe, add i lump of Ice, fill the glass with
Champagne, add a dash of Brandy on top, and
squeeze a piece of lemon peel on top.

39. Caf6 de Paris Cocktail.

   I white of a Fresh Egg, J Gin, J Syrup of Anisette,
I teaspoonful of Fresh Cream.

   (Recipe from the Cafi de Paris, Broadway, New
York.)

40. Carrol Cocktail.

   i Italian Vermouth, f Brandy.
   Serve with pickled walnut in cocktail glass.
   (This cocktail was well known at the Plaza Flotel,
New York, before Prohibition.)

41. Champagne Cocktail.

   In a wineglass put i lump of Sugar saturated
with Angostura Bitters, add i lump of Ice, fill the
glass with Champagne, squeeze a piece of lemon
peel on top, stir, and serve.

C  21
42. Chocolate Cocktail.

   1 yolk of a Fresh Egg, J Yellow Chartreuse,
i Port Wine, i teaspoonful of Ground Chocolate.

    Shake well.

43. Chorus Lady Cocktail.

   J Gin, J Italian Vermouth, J French Vermouth,
add the Juice of a J Orange.

   Serve in old-fashioned whisky glass with slice
of orange.

   (Recipe by Al Dates, Savannah.)

44. Cinzano Cocktail.

   2 dashes of Angostura, 2 dashes of Orange Bitters,
I glass of Cinzano Vermouth.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass, and
squeeze orange peel on top.

45. Cinzano Champagne Cocktail.
   In a wineglass put i lump of Sugar, 2 dashes of

Angostura, i dash of Cura9ao, i teaspoonful Brandy,
I lump of Ice.

    Fill balance with that well-known Cinzano

Champagne, stir slightly, and squeeze Lemon Peel
on top.

   Note.--This cocktail is very popular in all
American bars, as Cinzano Champagne is very
reasonable in price.

46. Clover Club Cocktail.

   I white of Fresh Egg, Juice of small Lime (or
J Lemon), i teaspoonful Raspberry Syrup, i Gin,

I Italian Vermouth.

    Note.^--In London for some time it has been the

custom to serve Grenadine instead of Raspberry.
47. Clover Leaf Cocktail.

    I white of Egg, Jnice of a small Lime (or J Lemon),
I teaspoonful of Grenadine, i sprig of Fresh Mint,
J Gin, ^ Italian Vermouth.

    Shake well, strain, and leave mint-leaf on top.

48. Champagne Pick-me-Up.

    I liqueur of Brandy, i liqueur of FrenchVermouth,
I teaspoonful of Gommc Syrup.

   Shake well, strain in a wineglass, and add
Champagne.

   (Recipe by Johnny Leapold, Grand Circle, AiX'
les-Bains.)

49. Cooperstown Cocktail.

   J French Vermouth, 5 Gin, 2 sprigs of Fresh Mint.

50. Coffee Cocktail.

   I yolk of a Fresh Egg, i teaspoonful of Sugar
or Gomme Syrup, J Port Wine, J Brandy, 1 dash

Curagao.

   Shake well, strain into a small wineglass, and
grate a little nutmeg on top.

   Note.--The name of this drink is a misnomer, as
coffee and bitters are not to be found among its
ingredients, but it looks like coffee when it has
been properly concocted, hence probably its name.

51. Commodore Cocktail.

   I teaspoonful Gomme Syrup, 2 dashes Orange
Bitters, Juice of half a Lime, glass of Rye Whisky.

   (Recipe by Phil Gross, Cincinnati, O.)

                                                        23
 52. Coronation Cocktail.

    Use mixing glass.
    Fill half full with cracked Ice, 2 dashes
 Maraschino, 3 dashes Orange Bitters, § French
 Vermouth, J Sherry.
    [Recipe by Joseph Rose, of Murray Bros. Caf6,

 Newark, N.'j., in 1903.)

 53. Colonial Cocktail.

    § Gin, J Juice of Grape Fruit, i dash of

 Maraschino.

 54. Country Club Cooler.
    Serve in tumbler, i glass French Vermouth,

 I teaspoonful Grenadine, 2 lumps of Ice, fill with

 Soda Water.

 55. Cuban Cocktail.

   f Brandy, t Apricot Brandy, Juice of half a

Lime.

 56. Club Cocktail.

    i Vermouth Italian, J Gin, 2 dashes Orange
Bitters, i teaspoonful Gomme Syrup, i Yellow

Chartreuse.

    (C. Mahoney's Recipe.)

57. C. F. H. Cocktail.

   5 Grenadine, J Swedish Punch, J Calvados,
J Lemon Juice, J Gin.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass with a
cherry.

                                                             24
58. Chinese Cocktail.

    I dash Angostura, 3 dashes Maraschino, 3 dashes
Curai^ao, J Syrup Grenadine, i Jamaica Rum.

     Shake well and strain.

    (Recipe by F. P. Newman, Paris.)

59. Cream Fizz.

   I glass of Gin, Juice of i Lemon, i teaspoonful
Sugar or Gomme ; add last i teaspoonful of Fresh

Cream.

   Shake well, strain into wineglass, and squirt of
soda on top.

60. Claret Lemonade.

   Use large tumbler.
    Half fill with fine Ice, Juice of i Lemon, 2 tea-
spoonfuls Gomme Syrup, i glass of Claret, and fill
with syphon.
   Stir slowly, and serve with a straw.

61. Champagne Cup.
   Put 2 or 3 lumps of Ice in a large jug and add

I liqueur of Brandy, i liqueur of Maraschino,
I liqueur of Curasao, i bottle of Champagne, i bottle

of Soda Water.
    Stir well, and decorate with fruits in season and

two sprigs of fresh mint and a slice of cucumber
peel.

62. Cider Cup.
   I liqueur of Calvados, 1 liqueur of Brandy,

I liqueur of Curasao, i bottle of Cider, i bottle of

Perner or Soda Water.

   Prepare the same way as Champagne Cup.

                                                         25
Peter F. Heering

COPENHAGEN

By Appointment  ^  to

  Purveyor of      His Maiesty
 Cherry Brandy
                   Kinfl Gcur({e V.

CHERRY BRANDY
CHERRY WHISKY

        KUMMEL
        CURACAO

LIQUEUR PALMET

  C1IHBB9

                   ITALIAN

VERMOUTH

        Not too Sweet ; Not too Dry

THE :F0UNDATI0N FOR CHOICE COCKTAILS

                                               26
63. Dacqueri Cocktail.
   J Bacardi, Juice of a Fresh Lime, J Grenadine.
    Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass.
    (Thi.s was a very popular cocktail in America

before Prohibition came in. Bacardi is made in
Cuba.)

64. Diabola Cocktail.

   f Dubonnet, J Gin, 2 dashes of Orgeat Syrup.
   (By F. Newman, Paris.)

65. Dunlop Cocktail.
   J Sherry, § Rum, i dash Angostura Bitters.

66. Dempsey Cocktail.
   f Calvados, J Gin, 2 dashes Grenadine, i dash

Anis del Osa.

   (Recipe by Fred. Martin, Casino, Deauville, 1922.)

67. Derby Cocktail.
   2 dashes Peach and Bitters, one sprig of Fresh

Mint, I glass Gordon Gin.
   Stir and strain into cocktail glass. Serve with

olive.

   (Recipe E. G. De Gaslreaiix, of Canal and Vine
Streets, Cincinnati, 1903.)

68. Dream Cocktail.

   J Curasao, | Brandy, i dash Absinthe.

69. Du Barry Cocktail.
    I dash Boonkam Bitters, 2 dashes Absinthe,

2 dashes Gomme Syrup, f Gin, ^ French Vermouth.
   Shake well. Strain into cocktail glass with

quarter slice of orange.

                                                         27
70. Dubonnet Cocktail.

    f Dubonnet, J Gin.

71. Douglas Cocktail.
    5 Gordon Gin, i French Vermouth.
    Shake well, strain, squeeze of orange peel on

top.

72. Doctor Cocktail.

   i Cederlund Swedish Punch, J Orange Juice,
J Lemon Juice.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

73. Diki-Diki Cocktail.

   5 Calvados, J Caloric Punch (Swedish Punch),
^ Grape Fruit j nice.

   (This is a very popular cocktail in London by
" Robert," the well known bar-tender.)

74. Dubonnet Fizz.

   Juice of half an Orange, Juice of half a Lemon,
I teaspoonful of Cherry Brandy, i glass Dubonnet.

   Shake well, strain into wineglass, and squirt of
syphon.

  PERRIER JOUET

                                    & CO.

CHAMPAGNE

By Appointment              H.M.
                    King George V,

                28
75. East India Cocktail.

   I teaspoonful of Curafao, i teaspoonful of Pine
apple Syrup, 2 dashes Angostura Bitters, J Brandy.

   Stir up with a spoon, strain into a cocktail glass,
serve with a cherry.

   (Recipe by Harry Johnson, of Neiv Orleans.)

76. Elk's Own Cocktail.
   White of a Fresh Egg, J Rye Whisky, J Port Wine

Juice of half Lemon, i teaspoonful Sugar.
   Shake well, strain into wineglass, and a slice of

pineapple.

77. Eagle's Dream Cocktail.
   I teaspoonful Sugar or Gomme Syrup, i white

of Egg, I Gin, J Creme Yvette, Juice of J Lemon.
   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass, with

cherry.

78. Eye-opener Cocktail.
   I yolk of Fresh Egg, i teaspoonful of Sugar,

2 dashes of Absinthe, 2 dashes of Curafao, 2 dashes
of Creme de Noyau, J Rum.

   [Recipe by F. Neivman, Paris, 1907.)

79. E. Nos Cocktail.

   J French Vermouth, f Gordon Gin, 3 dashes of

Absinthe.
   Shake well and strain.

80. Egg Flip.

   I yolk of Egg, 2 dashes Curafao, f Brandy,
I teaspoonful Gomme Syrup.

   Shake well and strain into medium-sized wine
glass and grate nutmeg on top.

                                                            29
81. Egg Lemonade.

   Fill your shaker half full with chopped Ice and
add I Fresh Egg, 2 teaspoonfuls of Sugar, Juice

of I Lemon.

   Shake well and strain into large tumbler. Fill

with Soda Water.

82. Egg Nogg
   Fill the shaker hali full with chopped Ice and

add I Fresh Egg, J teaspoonful of Sugar, i glass
of Brandy, i glass of Rum, the remainder

Fresh Milk.

   Shake well, and strain into medium-sized tumbler.
Grate a little nutmeg on top and serve.

83. Egg Nogg (Hot)
   Use large bar glass.
   I teaspoonful Sugar,' i Fresh Egg.
  Beat well up with spoon by turning briskly,

add boiling Milk while stirring, then add i glass

Brandy, i glass Rum.

   Stir until properly blended, then grate, nutmeg

on top and serve.

84. Eton Blazer.

   In a large tumbler put 3 or 4lumps ofice, the juice
of one Lemon, i glass of Gilbey's Gin, ^ glass
Grosielle Syrup, J glass of Kir.sch. Fill ba lance

with Soda, stir well and serve with straws.

85. Empire Punch.

   In a large tumbler put 3 or 4 lumps of ice, then
add I tea.'^poonful Maraschino, i teaspoonful
Cura^oa (Bols), i teaspoonful Benedictine, i tea
spoonful Brandy, 1 wine glass of Claret. FiU

balance with Champagne, stir well and decorate

with fruits in season.

   (Recipe from Charlie Forrester, Casino--Dieppe,

and Carlion--Cannes.)

                                                          30
86. Fairbank Cocktail.

   2 dashes of Creme do Noyau, 2 dashes of Orange
Bitters, ^ French Vermouth, J Gin.

87. Fascinator Cocktail.

   J Hollands Gin, J Brandy, i White Mint,

    Maraschino.

88. Fourth Degree Cocktail.
   J Gin, J French Vermouth, J Italian Vermouth,

4 dashes of Absinthe.

89. Futurity Cocktail.
   2 dashes of Angostura Bitters, J Italian Vermouth,

5 Sloe Gin.

90. Fox River Cocktail.

   In a wineglass put i lump of Sugar saturated
with Peach Bitters, add i lump of lee, one glass
of Bourbon Whisky, and i teaspoonful of Creme

de Cacao.

   Squeeze a piece of lemon peel on top, stir
slightly, and serve.

91. Fernet Branca Cocktail.

   I teaspoonful Cura9ao, ^ Fernet Branca,
§ Cinzano Vermouth.

92. Flu Cocktail.

    I dash of Jamaica Ginger, i teaspoonful of Lemon
Juice. T tea.spoonful Rock Candy Syrup, i teaspoon
ful Ginger Brandy, i glass of Rye Whisky.

   Stir together and serve in same glass.

                                                              31
93. Fish" House Punch.
   Half fill a l<irge tumbler with fine Ice, add

1 glass of Whisky, the J nice of I Lemon. Fill with
syphon.

   Stir, decorate with fruits in season, and float a
little Rum on top, and serve with straw.

    KUMMEL IS KUMMEL

     and for this liqueur to be worthy of the name of
                     KUMMEL

           It must be made from the carraway seed
           of Livonia, whilst it is fresh and green,
           distilled and mixed with fine old spirit

           wolfschmidt

                                     is all that

                     KUMMEL

                                     should be.

    It is guaranteed distilled and made entirely in Riga
                        The same for 75 years

                     Prices and samples on application to :--
                   CHRISTOPHER & Co. Ltd.

                                        CONTROLLING AGENT

MAURICE MEYER '

                          LONDON, E.G.. 3.

                                                          32
94. Gilroy Cocktail.
   i Gin, J Noilly Pratt, J Cherry Brandy, J Kirsch.
   Shake well. Strain into cocktail glass.

95. Gin Cocktail.

   I teaspoonful of Gomme Syrup, 2 dashes of
Orange Bitters, 2 dashes of Angostura Bitters,

remainder Gin.

   Shake well and serve with cherry.

96. Greenbriar Cocktail.            Vermouth,

   I dash Peach Bitters, J French
5 Sherry, one sprig of Fresh Mint.

   Shake well, and strain.

97. Gazette Cocktail.

   1 teaspoonful Gomme Syrup, i teaspoonful
Lemon J uice, 2 dashes of Orange Bitters, i Brandy,

J Italian Vermouth.
   Serve in wineglass with one whole slice of lemon.

   [Recipe by Win. Reno, at the Freerstone Cafi,

Toledo, Ohio.)

98. Gloom Raiser.

   2 dashes of Absinthe, 2 dashes of Grenadine,

5 Gordon Gin, i French Vermouth, Lemon Peel.
   [Recipe by " Robert," of the Embassy.)

99. Gimlet.

   J Coates' Plymouth Gin, 4 Rose's Lime Juice

Cordial.

   Stir, and serve in same glass. Can be iced it

desired.

   A very popular beverage in the Navy.

                                                          33
100. Grenadier Cocktail.

    I dash of Jamaica Ginger, J Ginger Brandy,
f Brandy, i teaspoonful of Gomme Syrup.

 101. Gin Fizz.

    I teaspoonful of Sugar or Syrup of Gomme, the
Juice of I lemon, i glass of Gin.

    Shake well, strain into medium-sized tumbler,
and fill up with Soda Water.

102. Golden Fizz.

   Similar to Gin Fizz, Yolk of a Fresh Eerg

added.

103. Gin Smash.

   Prepared the same way as a Brandy Smash.

104. Gin Daisy.
   Same as Brandy Daisy.

105. Gin Flip.
   Same as Brandy Flip.

106. Gin Fix.

   Same as Brandy Fix.

107. Gin Julip.

  Prepared the same way as Mint Julip.

108. Gin Sling.

  Juice of I Lemon, i glass of Gin, i teaspoonful
of Grenadine, i wineglass of plain water.

   Shake well and strain into medium-sized tumbler.

                                                         34
109. Gin Highball is a Gin and Soda, with
Lemon Peel squeezed in glass, and a lump of Ice.

110. Golden SUpper
    4 glass of Yellow Chartreuse into small wine

glass, then drop one yolk of a Fresh Egg and 4 glass
Eau de Vie de Dantzig.

   (Recipe by Harry Johnson, New Orleans.)

111. Gin Rickey.
   Put I lump of ice in a tumbler, cut a fresh lime

in half and squeeze the juice in the glass, and add
I glass of Gin, and fill balance with Seltzer or Soda

Water.

112. Gangadine Cocktail.
   1 teaspoonful of Framboise Syrup, 4 Oxygen^e

Cusenier, 4 Gin, 4 White Mint.
   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass.
   (Note.--Oxygcnee is a white Absinthe which is

now manufactured in Belgium since its prohibition
in France.)

113. Green Room Cocktail.

   5 French Vermouth, 4 Brandy, 2 dashes of
Cura^oa.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

114. Guards' Cocktail.

   2 dashes Curafoa, f Italian Vermouth, 4
Gilbey's Gin.

   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass.

                                                          35
The LP.M

                                      DELHI

            The ' Taller" of India

A Weekly Illustrated
Magazine of the highest
class. Society, Fashions,
Army, Sporting, and
other Special Features.

Original Articles only.

Finest Illustrations.

Printed by the Pioneer Press of India.

SPECIMEN COPY FREE on .APPLICATION

Head Office:  I  London Office :

ALLAHABAD I 11 ARUNDEL St.. w.c.
115 Hoola-Hoola Cocktail.

  i Gin. i Curafao, J Orange Juice.

116. Homestead Cocktail.

  J Italian Vermouth, J Gin, i slice of Orange.
  Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

117. Hoffman House Cocktail.

   f Nicholson Gin, J French Vermouth, i dash of

Orange Bitters.

  Shake well and strain into cocktail glass, and

squeeze orange peel on top.

118. Horse's Neck.

  Peel a whole rind of lemon as you would an apple,
then put in large tumbler, add a few lumps of Ice,
I teaspoonful of Sugar, i glass of Gin, then fill up

with Ginger Ale.

119. Hakam-Hiccup Cocktail.
   I dash Orange Bitters, 2 dashes Cura9ao, § Gin,

I Italian Vermouth.

  [Recipefro}n the Hakaui-Hiccitp Bay, Eastbourne.)

120. Hasty Cocktail.
   I dash of Absinthe, i teaspoonful of Grenadine,
  French Vermouth, f Gordon Gin.

  Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

121. Harvard Cocktail.               Angostura,

   I dash of Gomme Syrup, 2 dashes

i Brandy, J Martini Rossi Vermouth.
   Shake well, and strain.

B  37
                           ,1

122. Hot Egg Nogg.

   Use medium-sized tumbler.

  I Fresh Egg, i teaspoonful Sugar. Beat well

up, then add boiling Milk, then stir well together
and add i glass of Brandy and i glass of Rum.

   Stir again, then grate nutmeg on top. Then

serve.

   (Note.--It is really necessary to put a bar spoon
in glass while pouring in the hot milk to prevent the
glass from cracking.)

123. Hot Grog.
   I tea.spoonful of Sugar, Juice of ^ a Lemon.
   Dissolve with a little hot water, then add i glass

of Brandy, i glass of Rum, 2 cloves, T small piece
of Cinnamon. Fill up balance with hot water, put
a slice of lemon into it, stir up well, grate nutmeg

on top, and serve.

124. Harry's Cocktail.
    J Gin, J Italian Vermouth, i dash of Absinthe,

2 sprigs of Fresh Mint.
    Shake well and strain into cocktail glass, serve

 with a stuffed olive.

 125. Harry's Pick-me-up.
    I teaspoonful of Grenadine Syrup, i glass of

 Brandy, the juice of J a iemon.

     Shake well and strain into medium sized wine

 glass, and fill balance with Champagne.

                                               38
126. Inca Cocktail.

   2 dashes of Orgeat Syrup; 2 dashes of Orange
Bitters. ^ Plymouth Gin, J Dry Sherry, J French

Vermouth.

   Strain into cocktail glass and add a small chunk
of pineapple.

   {Invented by H. C. Harrison when in charge at
the Embassy liar, London.)

127. Irish Cocktail.

   2 dashes of Absinthe, 2 da.shes of Curasao, i dash
of Maraschino, i dash of Angostura, f Bushmill's
Irish Whisky.

   Shake well, strain into cocktail glass, add
I medium-sized olive and squeeze lemon peel on
top, and serve.

128. Ink Street Cocktail.

   J Rye Whisky, J Orange Juice, I Lemon Juice.
   Shake well, then strain into cocktail gla-ss.
   (Ink Street, otherwise known as Fleet Street
the centre of the Newspaper World.)

                                                        39

                             J
Deauville Brand"

             ABSOLUTELY PURE SUGAR

Can be used either Cold or as " Hot Punches "
                          in Soda Fountains.

,fs suppliedto the Lcuding Stores, Hotels, 1{estaurauts,
                           Clubs^ etc.

      A PURE GENUINE BEVERAGE FOR CHILDREN.

May be obtained from

           Messrs. CHRISTOPHER & Co., Ltd.,
                          43 Pall Mall, S.W.

Manufacturer :

A. LEPETIT

35 RUPERT STREET, Shaftesbury Avenue,

Established 1902      LONDON, W. I.

                  40
129. Jack Rose Cocktail.

   i Apple Jack or Calvados, J Gin, -jV French
Vermouth, Italian Vermouth, J Orange Juice,
J Lime or Lemon J nice. Grenadine enough to

colour.

130. Japanese Cocktail.
   1 teaspoonful Orgeat Syrup, 2 dashes Angostura

Bitters, i glass Brandy.
   Shake well, strain into cocktail glass, with a

cherry.

131. Jockey Club Cocktail.
   I dash Orange Bitters, i dash Angostura Bitters,

2 dashes Creme de Noyau, i teaspoonful Lemon
Juice, j Gin.

   Shake well, strain into cocktail glass, and squeeze
lemon peel on top.

132. J. O. S. Cocktail.

      Gin, J French Vermouth, ^ Italian Vermouth,
I dash, of Orange Bitters, i dash of Lemon Juice,
I dash of Brandy.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass and
squeeze lemon peel on top.

133. Jupiter Cocktail.
   I teaspoonful Parfait Amour, i teaspoonful of

Orange juice, J French Vermouth, f Gin.

134. Journalist Cocktail.

   I dash Angostura, 2 dashes Curagao, 2 dashes
Lemon Juice, J French Vermouth, j Italian Ver

mouth, I Gin.
7

             135. Jersey Cocktail.
               Put 3 or 4 lumps of Ice in a large tumbler, 3 or

             4 dashes of Angostura Bitters. Fill balance with
            Cider. Slightly stir.

                (Recipe from the Hoffman House, New York.)

                 136. John Collins.

                Put 3 or 4 lumps of Ice in a large tumbler, Juice
             of I Lemon, 2 teaspoonfuls of Sugar, i glass of

                Hollands Gin. Fill balance with Soda Water.
                 Stir well.

                (It has been the practice of using London Gin in
            this drink for some time.)

       FINEST LONDON GIN

                          FOR COCKTAILS
                                          USE

                          THE FINEST GIN

     Christopher's Unsweetened

                                                                                      42
137. Knock-out Cocktail.

   4 Gin, J French Vermouth, J Absinthe, i teaspoon-

ful of White Mint.

138. Knickerbocker Cocktail.

   I teaspoonful of Raspberry Syrup, I teaspoonful
of Lemon Juice, i teaspoonful of Orange Juice,
I chunk of Pineapple, f Rum, i dashes of Cura9ao.

"Dubonnet"

      THE       M          OBTAINABLE
      BEST                      AT ALL
   KNOWN       llir- 'Ll        HOTELS
APPETIZER
   IN THE      iDubonnri     BARS, AND
   WORLD                  RESTAURANTS
               1
        ·=?='                               etc.

                                     =5°

             Sole Agenls Jot Great Brilairi :

           CONSTANT MERTENS & CO.
9 CHARING CROSS ROAD, LONDON

             Dubonnet, Rue Mornay, Paris

                                              43
A. J.Van Raalte

59 ST. MARTINS LANE

          W.C. 2

Phones : GERRARD 1109  VICTORIA 2464

      Established nearly a Century

For FINE HAVANA and all

other CIGARS & CIGARETTES

Wc will be pleased to send quotations at
      Wholesale Shippers' Prices

                      on application

SUPPLIER TO MOST OF THE LEADING
                  WEST END CLUBS

Any Size, Shape, or Brand Quoted for

bock      includins ·  corona

J. S. MURIAS           PUNCH

PARTAGAS               UPMANN

ROMEO y JULIET, etc., etc.

                    Sole Proprietor of

               PALMA de CUBA

    MANGARNA PERFECTOS, etc.
We have the pleasure of being recommended by

     Messrs. Christopher & Co., Ltd.
   Officers' Messes, Ships, etc.. Supplied

                           Also IN Bond

              44
139. Leave-it-to-me Cocktail.

  I teaspoonful Raspberry Syrup,- teaspoonful
Lemoa Juice, i dash Alaraschino, 5 Gin.

140. Lerol Cocktail.

   I yolk of Fresh Egg, J Cura9ao, ^ Brandy, J Sloe
Gin, I teaspoonful of Raspberry Syrup, i teaspoon
ful of Cream, i teaspoonful of Lemon Juice.

141. Lone Tree Cocktail.

   J Gin, J Italian Vermouth, J French Vermouth.
   Squeeze orange peel in shaker.

142. Lasky Cocktail.

  J Caloric Punch, j Gin, J Welsh's Grape Juice.
   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

143. Lawhill Cocktail.

   I dash of Angostura, i dash of Absinthe, i dash of
Marachiho, i French Vermouth, 4 Watson's No. 10
Whisky.

   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass.

144. Locotnotive.

^ I teaspoonful of Honey, i teaspoonful of Cura9oa,
I yolk of a fresh Egg, i glass of Port Wine.

   Shake well and strain into medium sized wine
glass.

145. Lemon Squash.
   In a large tumbler put the juice of one I.emon, 2

teaspoonfuls of Castor Sugar, half fill the glass with

cracked Ice, fill balance Soda, and stir well.

                                                            45
r

       CUSENIER'S

                      Necessities for Good Cocktails--see Recipes
                       CALVADOS or APPLEJACK

                                           OXYGENEE

              Syrups : GRENADINE, GOMME,

                     CITRON, RASPBERRY, etc.

                       VERMOUTH (French)

                                                                         ALSO

              "FREEZOMINT" (Creme de Menthe)
               CURACAO ORANGE, Extra Sec.

                                 CREME DE CACAO

                CREME DE VIOLETTES, etc., etc.
                             [All the latter made with Brandp)

                           SAVE TIME AND TROUBLE AND BUY THE

                            " MINNEHAHA " BRAND

                     ready-for-use COCKTAILS

                  DRY MARTINI and MANHATTAN
                     (Made with finest quality Vermouth Gin or
                     Whiaky, according to recipe o( the Knicker
                                   bocker Club, New York)

                                       Wholesale Agents :

          GEO. IDLE, CHAPMAN & Co., Ltd.

                     65 LOWER THAMES STREET
                                      LONDON, E.G. 3

                                 Retail from CHRISTOPHER & Co., Ltd.

                                                                  46
146. Martini Cocktail.

   5 Gin, J French Vermouth, (Orange or Angostura
added if required).

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

147. Martini (Sweet).
   5 Italian Vermouth, ^ Gin, i dash Gomme Syrup.
   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass, with

a cherry.

148. Martini (Medium).
   J Gin, J French Vermouth, J Italian Vermouth.

149. Manhattan Cocktail.

   I dash of Angostura Bitters, § Rye Whisky,
J Italian Vermouth.

   Shake well, strain into cocktail glass, with cherry.
   (Named after the island on which stands New
York city.)

150. Maiden's Blush Cocktail.

   J Gin, i Oxygenee Cusenier or Absinthe, i tea-
spoonful of Grenadine.

151. Mississippi Mule Cocktail.
    5 Gin, i Cassis, J Lemon Juice.

152. Mint Cocktail.

    I dash Orange Bitters, i dash Angostura Bitters,
2 dashes Gomme Syrup, i dash Absinthe, f Bourbon
Whisky.

   Add a few sprigs of Fresh Mint.
   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

                                                        47
153. Millionaire Cocktail.

   I white of a Fresh Egg. 2 dashes of Cura9ao
(Orange), i teaspoonful of Grenadine, 3 Rye Whisky.

   Shake well. Strain into cocktail glass.
   (Recipe from Ritz Hotel, London.)

154. Mountain Cocktail.

   I white of a Fresh Egg, J Lemon Syrup, J French
Vermouth, J Rye Whisky, 3 dashes Orange Bitters.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass with i
cherry.

   (Recipe from Hoffman House, New York.)

155. Modern Cocktail.

   I dash Orange Bittei's, i dash Absinthe, 4 dashes
Gommc Syrup, J Scotch Whisky, ^ Sloe Gin.

   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass, with

cherry.

156. Montana Cocktail.

   2 dashes of Anisette, 3 dashes Orange Bitters,
i French Vermouth, ^ Sloe Gin.

   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass, and
squeeze lemon peel on top.

157. Monkey's Gland Cocktail.
   I dash of Absinthe, i teaspoonful of Grenadine,

J Orange Juice, Gordon Gin.

   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass.
   (Invented by the Author, and deriving its name
from Voronoff's experiments in rejuvenation.)

158. Mayfair Cocktail.

  i Gin, J Orange Juice, 3 or 4 dashes Apricot
Syrup, flavoured with a little Clove Syrup.

   (Recipe by " Robert," Embassy.)

                                             48
159. Morning Cocktail.

   2 dashes Cura9ao, 2 dashes Maraschino, 2 dashes
Orange Bitters, 2 dashes Absinthe, i wineglass
Brandy, J wineglass French Vermouth.

   Stir up well with a spoon ; strain into cocktail
glass, putting in a cherry. Twist a piece of lemon
peel on top and serve.

   (Recipe by Harry Johnson, Sdn Francisco.)

160. Magnolia.

   I teaspoonful of Syrup Gomme, i teaspoonfui
Cura9ao, i yolk of Fresh Fgg, i glass of Brandy.

   Shake well, strain into medium-sized wineglass,
and fill balance with Champagne.

161. Morning Glory Fizz.
   I white of Egg, i teaspoonful of Sugar, i Juice

of Lemon, i teaspoonful of Absinthe, i glass of
Scotch Whisky.

    Shake well, and strain into medium-sized tumbler.
Fill balance with Soda or !-yphon.

    (Recipe by Harry Johnson, oj New Orleans.)

162. Mamay Taylor.
   Put one slice of Lemon in a large tumbler, add

two pieces of Ice, i glass of Gin, i bottle of Schweppe's
Ginger Ale, and stir slightly.

 163. Mint Julip.
    I teaspoonful of Sugar, J wineglass of Water or

Soda, 3 or 4 sprigs of Fre.sh Mint.
    Muddle well until flavour of Mint is well extracted

then take out Mint, and add 2 glasses of old Bourbon

Whisky. Fill tumbler with fine shaved Ice, stir

                                                           49
 well until glass gets frosted, then take some sprigs

 of Mint and insert them in the Ice with stem down
 wards, so that the leaves will be on the surface in

 the shape of a bouquet. Add slices of orange, lemon,
 pineapple, and cherries on top.

 164. Milk Punch.

    I teaspoonful Sugar, i wineglass Brandy, J wine
 glass Rum, J Ice in shaker.

    Fill balance with Fresh Milk, shake, strain into
 medium-sized tumbler, and grate nutmeg on top.

 165. Milk Shake.

    I teaspoonful of Sugar, i Fresh Egg, J Ice in

 shaker.

    Fill balance with Fresh Milk, shake, and strain
into medium-sized tumbler and grate nutmeg on
top.

    (This drink is also known on the Continent as
" Lait de Poule.)

 166. May Blossom Fizz.
    I teaspoonful of Grenadine, juice of half a Lemon,

 I glass of Cederlund's Swedish Punch.
    Shake well and strain into a small tumbler, and

fill balance with Soda.

167. Moka Spitberg.
   In a small tumbler, fill with shaved Ice, add i

teaspoonful Castor Sugar, 2 teaspoonfuls thick

Fresh Cream, remainder Cold Coffee.

   Then fix your shaker on top of your glass and
shake gently. Set your glass down with shaker
until a few seconds, and afterwards remove your
shaker and serve your beverage (which will have a
large froth on top) with straws.

   (A very popular drink at the Grand Cercle, d'Aix-
les-Bains, France.)
168. New Orleans Gin Fizz.

   I white of Egg, I teaspoonful of Sugar, 2 dashes
of Fleur d'Oranger, i glass of Gin, Juice of i Lemon,
J the shaker of cracked Ice, lastly J wineglass of

Fresh Cream.

   Shake about two minutes, then strain into
tumbler and fill balance with syphon.

   (One of the most popular drinks mixed in the

Southern States of America.)

169. Night-Cap.
   I yolk of a Fresh Egg, J Anisette, ^ -Curafao

(Orange),-J Brandy.
   Shake well and strain into a small wineglass.
   (Recipe F. Newman, Paris.)

170. Nineteen-Twenty Cocktail.
   I dash of Ansinthe, ^ Pernod Kirschwasser, J

Crystal Gin, § French Vermouth, i teaspoonful of

Groiselle Syrup.
   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

171. Nineteen-Twenty Pick-me-up.
   J Gin, f Pernod Absinthe, i dash Angostura, i

dash Orange Bitters, i dash Gomme Syrup.
   Shake well, and strain into medium sized wine

glass, and fill balance with Soda.

                                                       51
   < :· , ,     BOLS i

   LUCAo           o/' the

   i^atinc/Gr'  ^A/nsterc/eim . '\

    The World's Favourite Liqueurs

                          for346Years

                                              DUTCH

   BOLS LIQUEURS

                                         KUMMEL

                               cura(;ao

                                    CREME DE
                                              MENTHE

                                        MARASCHINO

                                      VERY OLD GIN

^  WHOLESALE AGENTS UK.

I ' BROWN GORE &C? 40 TRINITY SQUARE LONDON tca
172. Old-Fashioned Whisky Cocktail.

   Take a small tumbler and put into it 4 dashes of
Angostura Bitters, i lump of Ice, ' i glass Rye
Whisky, r tablcspoonful castor sugar.

   Stir well until Sugar is dissolved, then squeeze
lemon peel on top and serve in same glass as mixed.

173. Olivette Cocktaii.

   2 dashes Gomme Syrup, 3 dashes Orange Bitters,
3 dashes Absinthe, f Plymouth Gin.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass with
olive, and squeeze lemon peel on top.

174. Orange Blossom.

   Juice of I Orange, i glass of Gordon Gin.
   Shake well and strain into small wineglass..

175. Opera Cocktail.

   f Gin, J Dubonnet, ^ Liqueur of Mandarine.
   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass, and
squeeze orange peel on top.

176. Orgeat Punch.

   Half fill a whisky tumbler with shaved Ice, then
add I glass of Orgeat Syrup, i glass of Brandy,
1 glass of Water.

   Stir well, then decorate with fruits in season and
serve with straws.

177. Orgeat Lemonade.

   Half fill a large tumbler with shaved Ice, i glass
of Orgeat Syrup, Juice of I Lemon.

   Fill balance with Soda, stir well, and serve with

straws.

.E  53
r

               178. Ostende Fizz.

              J wineglass Cassis, i wineglass Kirsch.

                  Shake well and strain into medium sized tumbler.
             Fill balance with syphon.
              179. Orangeade.

                Half fill a large tumbler with shaved Ice and add
             the Juice of i Orange, i teaspoonful of Sugar,
             I teaspoonful of Grenadine.

                Fill balance with plain water and stir well, and
           put one slice of orange in glass and serve with

                    straws.

              180. Orange Squash.

               Similar to Orangeade. Syphon instead of plain

                   water.

                                                                        34
 181. Pansy Blossom.

    2 dashes Angostura Bitters, i teaspoonful of

 Grenadine, i glass of Anis-del-oso.

 182. Parisian Cocktail.

    i Gin, i French Vermouth, J Cassis.

 183. Paradise Cocktail.

    J Gin, J Apricot Brandy, ^ Orange Juice.

 184. Plaza Cocktail.

    J Gin, i Italian Vermouth, J French Vermouth,
 I chunk fresh Pineapple.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass with a
small chunk pineapple.

 185. Perfect Cocktail.

    J Gin, J Italian Vermouth, J French Vermouth.
    Shake well, strain into cocktail glass, squeeze
orange peel on top.

186. Peto Cocktail.
    Same as Bronx Cocktail, with dash of Maraschino.

187. Polo Cocktail.

   i Grape Fruit Juice, J Orange Juice, f Gin."

188. Planter's Cocktail.

   i Rum, J Orange Juice, J Lemon Juice.

189. Pink Rose Cocktail.

   I white of a Fresh Egg, r teaspoonful Grenadine,
I teaspoonful Lemon Juice, i teaspoonful Fresh

Cream, f Gin.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

                                                         55
190. Pink Lady Cocktail.

  1 white of a Fresh Egg, 2 teaspoonfuls of

Grenadine, J Brandy, i Gin.
   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass,

191. Pussyfoot Cocktail.

   I yolk of a Fresk Egg, i teaspoonful of Grenadine,

juice of i Lemon, Juice of i Orange.
   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

192. Ping-Pong Cocktail.
   1 teaspoonful Lemon Juice, ^ Sloe Gin, J Crfeme

Yvette.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass. Add
cherry.

   (Recipefrom James G. Rennet, Brohen Heart Cafi,
i6 South Broadway, St. Louis, Mo., 1903.)

193. Princeton Cocktail.

   2 dashes of Orange Bitters, i teaspoonful of Port
Wine, I glass of Old Tom Gin.

   Shake well and strain. Squeeze lemon peel on

top.

 194. Prestoman Cocktail.

    I dash of Absinthe, Orange Juice, ^ Italian

Vermouth, f Brandy.

 195. Port Wine Cocktail.

    I dash of Angostura, i dash of Orange Bitters,
 2 dashes of Gurafao, i glass Port Wine.

    Stir well in mixing glass and strain into cocktail
glass.

                                               56
196. Porto Flip.
   I yolk of a Fresh Egg, i teaspoonful of Sugar,

I glass of Port Wine.
   Shake well and strain into small wineglass, and

grate nutmeg on top.

197. Pegu Club Cocktail.
   I dash of Angostura Bitters, i dash of Orange

Bitters, i teaspoonful Lime Juice (Rose's),
J Curafao (Orange), f Gin.

198. Princess Mary Cocktail.

   J Gin, J Cr^me de Cacao, J Fresh Cream.
   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.
   (This cocktail was introduced by myself in honour
of Princess Mary's wedding to Lord Lascelles,
February, 1922.)

199. Prairie Oyster Cocktail.

   Put 2 spoonfuls of Worcester Sauce (Lee and
Perrin's), drop the yolk of a Fresh Egg without
breaking, add a little red Pepper and Salt on top
and pour 2 spoonfuls of malt Vinegar on top.

200. Port Wine Cobbler.

   Half fill a tumbler with shaved Ice, add i glass
of Port Wine, J glass of Cura9ao, i glass of
Maraschino, i teaspoonful of Sugar.

   Fill balance with syphon and stir well, then
decorate the top with fruits in season.

                                                  57
201. Pousse Cafe.

   Can be made in a great many varieties by pouring
the heaviest liqueurs in rotation in your Pousse
Cafe glass, and different makes of liqueurs differ
a lot in weiglit. Following are two of the best :

202. Pousse Cafe No. 1.

   i Syrup Framboise, J Crdme de Violctte,
i Curasao (Orange), ^ Cr6me de Mcnthe (Verte),

j Kiimmel, J Brandy.

203. Pousse Cafe No. 2.

   J Anisette Syrup, J Cherry Brandy, J White
Mint, J Yellow Chartreuse, J Green Chartreuse,
J Grand Marnier.

    Great care should be taken so as to avoid the

different liqueurs from running together.

204. Pousse L'Amour.

   J Maraschino into small wineglass. Drop in
I yolk of a Fresh Egg, J Creme Vanilla (Green),
J Brandy.

   Proper attention must be paid that the yolk of
the egg does not run into the liqueur.

   (Recipe by Harry Johnson, New Orleans.)

205. Pall Mall Cocktail.

   r teaspoonful White Mint, i dash Orange Bitters,
} Italian Vermouth, J French Vermouth, J Gin.

   Shake well, and strain.

  (Recip6 from Guido, Cafe de Paris, Monte Carlo.)

                                            58
206. Queen's Cocktail.
   I chunk of Pineapple, i slice of Orange, in the

shaker. Add Ice, J Italian Vermouth, J French
Vermouth, J Gin.

   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass.

207. Quaker's Cocktail.

   i Brandy, i Rum, i Lemon Juice, J Raspberry

Syrup.
   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

208. Quartier Latin Cocktail.

   I teaspoonful of Cointreau, i Amer. Picon, J

Dubonnet.

   Shake weU and strain into cocktail glass.

209. Quarter-Deck Cocktail.
   I teaspoonful lime juice, f Rum, J Sherry.
   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

210. Quelle Vie Cocktail.
   J Kummel, f Brandy.
   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

                                                          59
NO COCKTAIL MIXER
SHOULD BE WITHOUT

"Kina-Lillet"

       A MOST  And proved to be a most
EXCELLENT
               valuable basis for mixing
     APERITIF

               cocktails.   It is made

               near Bordeaux, of fine

               French While Wine and

               is delightfully clean to

               the palate.  ^

WBAUU0            HOW TO USE

               "KINA-LILLET"

               1. As an Aperitif--simply

               cool the bottle and serve in
               sherry glass.

               2. Mix one third Christo
               pher's Dry Gin to two thirds

               of "ICina-Lillet," serve cold..

               3. As a Cocktail--2 dashes
               Orange Bitters, 2 dashes
               Creme - de - Noyeau. i glass

               Christopher's DryGin.i glass

               " Kina-Lillet " : stir well in

               ice, strain into cocktail glass
               and squeeze rind of orange

               on top.

               6o
211. Reform Cocktail.

   I dash Orange Bitters, J French Vermouth,
f Sherry.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass, with
cherry.

212. Rose Cocktail.

   5 French Vermouth, J Kirschwasser, J Syrup

Grosielle.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass, with
cherry.

   (Original Recipe from Johnny, of the Chatham

Bar, Paris.)

213. Rob Roy Cocktail.
   I dash of Angostura Bitters, J Italian Vermouth,

J Scotch Whisky.
    Shake well and strain into cocktail glass, with

cherry.

214. Royal Cocktail.
   J Gin, J French Vermouth, J Cherry Brandy,

 I dash Maraschino.

    Shake well and strain into cocktail glass, with
cherry.

   (Recipe by Otis Mackinney, from the Hotel Royal,

Nice, igoS.)

215. Royal Smiie.
   The juice of i Lime, i teaspoonful of Grenadine,

f Apple J ack or Calvados, Gin.
    Shake well and strain into small wineglass.

                                                        6i
216. Russ House Cocktail.

   2 dashes Orange Bitters, 2 dashes Rock Syrup,
3 dashes Blackberry, i glass of Whisky (Rye).

   (Recipe by Ed. V. Orsinger, Hotel Columbus,
Haryisburg, Pa.)

217. Rock and Rye.

   I teaspoonful of Rock Candy Syrup or Gomme
Syrup, Juice of J Lemon, i glass of Rye Whisky.

   Stir together and serve in same glass, and squeeze
lemon peel pn top.

218. Ruby Fizz.
   I teaspoonful of Sugar, 1 Fresh Egg, i glass of

Sloe Gin.
    Shake well and strain into medium-sized tumbler

and fill balance with Ginger Ale.
   (Recipe by Wm. Yarrow, of McDonagh Bros.,

Market Street, San Francisco, Gal.)

219. Royal Fizz.
   Yolk of a Fresh Egg, i teaspoonful of Grenadine,

J nice of i Orange, J nice of ^ Lemon, i glass of

Gordon Gin.

   Shake well and strain into medium-sized tumbler.
Fill balance with syphon.

220. Remsen Cooler.

   Peel a Lemon as you would an apple, then place
the rind into a large tumbler. Add 2 lumps of
Ice, the glass of Scotch Whisky. FiU balance

with Soda Water.

221. Rum Flip.
   As Brandy Flip.

                                                    62
222. Rum Sour.

   As Brandy Sour.

223. Rum Daisy.
   As Brandy Daisy.

224. Rum Smash.

   As Brandy Smash.

225. Rum Crustas.

   As Brandy Crustas.

226. Rum Julip.
   Same way prepared as Mint Julip.

COINT                                 EXTRA
                                         DRY
                                           for.

                                     ENGLAND

The White Liqueur with the Orange flavour

HARRY says :

        " This Liqueur is indispensable in my Recipes
      . Nos. 208, 229, 270, 274."

                                                          TO BE OBTAINED FROM

CHRISTOPHER & Co., Ltd.

                                       PALL MALL
Sole Agents ;
W. GLENDENNING & SONS, Ltd., 170 Shaftesbury Avenue,

                                     LONDON. W.C. 2.

                                             63
               SHERRY

           CHRISTOPHER & CO., LTD
                  have a choice selection of

                                  SHERRY

                                  OF ALL WINES, SHERRY IS
                                       PRACTICALLY THE ONLY

                                         ONE WHICH BEARS BEING
                                        LEFT OPEN WITHOUT
                                       DETERIORATION

          Try Christopher^s Pale Dry Sherry

                            BEFORE,

                     their Pale or Pale Gold

                            DURING,

                                                      and

          their Dark Gold or Brown Sherry

                         AFTER A MEAL

                                   PRICE LIST ON APPLICATION
                                                               64

r-
227. Saratoga Cocktail.
   I teaspoonful of Pineapple Syrup, 2 dashes

Orange Bitters, 2 dashes Maraschino, i glass of
Brandy.

   Shake well and strain into wineglass willi
2 Strawberries, and fill balance with Champagne.

228. "75 "Cocktail.

   I teaspoonful Grenadine, 2 dashes of Absinthe
or Anis-del-Oso, f Calvados, J Gin.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

   (This cocktail was very popular in France during
the war, and named after the French light field
gun.)

229. Side-Car Cocktail.

   J Cointreau (Triple see), J Brandy, J Lemon
Juice.

   (Recipe by MacGarry, the popular bar-tender at

Buck's Club, London.)

 230. Silver Cocktail. No. 1.

    1 white of Fresh Egg, i teasp.oonful Orgeat
Syrup, 2 dashes of Maraschino, 1 dash of Orange
Bitters, ^ French Vermouth, J Gordon Gin.

   (Recipe from Pat O'Brien, Knickerbocker Hotel,

 New York.)

 231. Silver Cocktail. No. 2.

    2 dashes Gomme Syrup, 2 dashes Orange Bitters,
 3 dashes Maraschino, i French Vermouth, ^ Gin.

    Stir up well with bar spoon, strain into cocktail
 glass, squeeze lemon peel on top.

    (Recipe by Harry Johnson, New Orleans.)

                                             65
232. Silver Streak Cocktail.
   ^ Bols Kummel, J Gordon's Gin.
   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

233. Sloeberry Cocktail.
    I dash Angostura Bitters, i dash Orange Bitters.

I glass Sloe Gin.

    Shake well, and strain.

234. Sir Walter Cocktail.

 (Commonly known as the " Swalter " Cocktail.)
   I teaspoonful of Grenadine, i tcaspoonful of

Curafao, i teaspoonful of Lemon Juice, ^ Brandy,
J Rum.

    Shake well and strain.

235. Star Cocktail.

   I teaspoonful Grape Fruit Juice, i dash Italian
Vermouth, i dash French Vermouth, ^ Apple Jack
or Calvados, J Gin.

    Shake well.

   (A very popular cocktail at the Plaza, New York.)

236. " S. G." Cocktail.

   I teaspoonful Grenadine, i Rye Whisky, J Lemon
Juice, Orange Juice.

    Shake well and strain.

   (This cocktail is very popular in the Officers'
Mess of the Scots Guards.)

237. Stanley Cocktail.

  J Grenadine, J Lemon Juice, J Rum, J Gin.

                                                       66
238. Stinger.
   J White Cr6me de Menthe, J Brandy.
   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

239. Sherry Cocktail.
   I dash Peach Bitters, i dash Orange Bitters,

I dash French Vermouth, i glass Pale Dry Sherry.

    Shake well and strain.

240. Soul Kiss.

   i Orange Juice, J Dubonnet, J French Ver
mouth, J Rye Whisky, i slice of Orange.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

241. Snowball Cocktail.

   J Crdme de Violette, J White Crfeme de Menthe,
J Anisette, J Fresh Cream, ^ Gin.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

242. Some Moth Cocktail.

   f Gordon Gin, ^ Noilly Pratt French Vermouth,

I dash of Absinthe.

   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass. Add
two pickled silver onions.

243. So So Cocktail.

   i Grenadine, J Calvados, J Cinzano Vermouth,
i Gin.

   {Invented by Mr. P. Soso, the popular manager
of Giro's Club, London.)

244. Sunshine Cocktail.

   I teaspoonful of Sugar, or Gomme Syrup, Juice
of J Lenion, add J Etournard's Brandy, f Kinloch's

" Liquid Sunshine " Rum.

    Shake well and strain.

                                             6?
245. Soda Cocktail.

   I teaspoonful of Sugar in a large tumbler,
4 dashes of Angostura.

   Mix it well, add i lump Ice, i piece of I.emon peel
squeezed in glass, and pour in a bottle of Schweppe's

Lemonade, and stir.

246. Sherry Flip.
   I yolk of Egg, I teaspoonful of Sugar, i glass of

Sherry.
   Shake well together and strain into small wine

glass, and grate nutmeg on top.

247. Swissess.

   I white of a Fresh Egg, i teaspoonful of Anisette

Syrup, I glass of Absinthe.
   Shake well together, and strain into small wine

glass, and add a dash of syphon on top.
   (This is a very good bracer for that feeling of the

morning of the night before.)

248. Stone Fence.

   Put I glass of Whisky in large tumbler, add i or
2 lumps of Ice, and fill balance with Cider.

249. South Side.

   Juice of I Lemon, i teaspoonful of Sugar, 2 or
3 sprigs of Fresh Mint, i glass of Gin (Gordon).

   Shake well and strain into medium-sized tumbler,
and add Syphon.

250. Sherry Cobbler.
   i Ice in tumbler, add J glass of Brandy, i glass of

Curafao, J glass of Maraschino, i glass of Sherry.
   Add syphon. Stir well, decorated' with fruits

in season. Float a little Port Wine on top.

                                                       68
251. Scotch Highball.
   In a large tumbler put I lump of Ice, squeeze a

piece of Lemon peel, hand Whisky to customer to

serve himself, and fill with Soda.
252. Soyer au Champagne.

   In a large tumbler put i measure of Vanilla Ice
Cream, 2 dashes Marsachino, "2 dashes Cura9ao,

2 dashes Brandy.
   Fill balance with Champagne, stir well, and

add a slice of Pineapple, a slice of Orange, and a
slice of Lemon, 2 Cherries, 2 Strawberries.

   (A very popular beverage on the Continent.)

253. Shandy Gaff.

   Equal parts Ginger Ale and Bass or Pale Ale.

254. Southern Beauty.

   I teaspoonful of Syrup Citron, juice of half a
Lime, i glass of Ponche-Soto, i glass of Brandy.

    Shake well and strain into medium-sized wine
glass, and fill balance with Soda.

   (A very popular drink at San Sebastian.)

                                           6g
Ports from the Wood

   CHRISTOPHER'S
    TAWNY & RUBY
            PORTS

              From the Wood

              ARE SELECTED WITH
         . THE GREATEST CARE,

              ARE SHIPPED ONLY
              FROM THE LEADING
              FIRMS IN OPORTO, AND
              ARE MODERATE IN

                                PRICE

   PRICE LIST ON APPLICATION

                                                  70
255. Tango Cocktail.
   1 Curasao, J Orange Juice, J Italian Vermouth,

J Plymouth Gin.
   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass, and

squeeze orange peel on top.

256. Turf Cocktail.

   2 dashes of Orange Bitters, 2 dashes of Maraschino,
2 dashes of Absinthe, i French Vermouth, i Ply

mouth Gin.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass with

an olive.

257. Tipperary Cocktail.
   i Orange Juice, J Grenadine, J Noilly Pratt

French Vermouth, J Gordon's Gin, 2 sprigs of

Fresh Mint.
    Shake well and strain.

258. Tuxedo Cocktail.

    I dash Maraschino, i dash Absinthe, 2 dashes
Orange Bitters, J Sir Burnett's Tom Gin, J French

Vermouth.

   Stir up well with a spoon, strain into cocktail
glass, putting in a cherry. Squeeze lemon peel
on top.

259. Tropical Cocktail.
   I dash of Angostura, i dash of Orange Bitters,

J Crfeme de Cacao, J Maraschino, J French Ver

mouth.

   Stir well, strain into cocktail glass, with cherry.

260. Trinity Cocktail.
   i French Vermouth, ^ Italian Vermouth, J Gin.

                                                    71
261. Third Degree Cocktail.
   f Plymouth Gin, J French Vermouth, 4 dashes

of Absinthe.

   Shake well and strain into old-fashioned whisky
glass.

262. Trilby Cocktail.
   2 dashes of Absinthe, 2 dashes of Orange Bitters,

J Parfait d'Amour Liqueur, J Scotch Whisky,
J Italian Vermouth.

    Shake well and strain into cocktail glass, with
cherry.

263. Thunder Cocktail.

   I teaspoonful Gomme Syrup, I yolk of Egg,
I glass of Brandy, i sprinkle of Cayenne Pepper.

    Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

264. Tom Collins.

    In a large tumbler put 2 or 3 lumps of Ice, i tea-
spoonful of Sugar, the Juice of i Lemon, i glass

 of Old Tom Gin.

    Fill balance with syphon, stir weU, and serve.

 265. Texas Fizz.

    I teaspoonful of Sugar, Juice of J Orange, Juice
of i Lemon, i glass of Gin.

     Shake well and strain into medium-sized tumbler

 and add syphon.

 266. Tantalus Cocktail.

    J Forbidden Fruit Liqueur, J Brandy, J Lemon
 Juice.

                                                   72
267. Vermouth Cocktail.

   2 dashes of Angostura, 2 dashes of Orange BitterS]
2 dashes of Gomme Syrup, ^ glass French Vermouth,
i glass Italian Vermouth.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass, and
squeeze lemon peel on top.

268. Virgin Cocktail.
   J Forbidden Fruit Liqueur, i White Cr^me ,de

Menthe, ^ Gin.
   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.'

269. Vie en Rose Cocktail.
   I Lemon Juice, J Grenadine, J Gin, J Kirschwasser.

    Shake well and strain.

270. Various Continental Beverages.
    Served all in a large tumbler ;

    (1) Kirsch and Grenadine.
    I glass Kirsch (wineglass), J glass Grenadine,

balance with Soda.

    (2) Picon Grenadine.
    I glass Amer. Picon, ^ glass Grenadine,
balance with syphon.

    (3) Dubonnet Citron.
    I glass Dubonnet, J glass Syrup Citron, balance

Soda Water.

    (4) Kirsch and Cassis.
    I glass Cassis, J glass Kirsch, balance Soda Water.

                                                      73
Crusted Ports

           OLD IN BOTTLE

Christopher's Crusted Ports

        are full and dry Vintage
         Character Wines, with
        several years maturity

          in bottle.

        They are recommended
        as a good substitute for
        Vintage Ports, particu
        larly at the high prices
        now ruling for Vintage

          Wines.

PRICE LIST ON APPLICATION

                                                   74
   (5) Vermouth Cassis.
   I glass Noilly Pratt Vermouth, J glass Cassis,

Soda Water.

   (6) Vermouth Curagao.
   I glass French Vermouth, J glass Curagao, Soda

Water.

   (7) Chambery Fraisette.
   I glass Vermouth de Chambery, J glass Fraisette,

Soda Water,

   (8) Cinzano and Curagao.
   I glass Cinzano Vermouth, J glass Curagao,

balance Soda Water.

   (9) Anis del Oso and Grenadine.
   I glass Anis del Oso, J glass Grenadine, balance

Soda Water.

   (10) Champagne de Pauvre.
   I glass of Brandy, J glass of Syrup Citron,

balance Soda Water.

   (11) Byrrh-Cassis.
   I glass Byrrh, J glass Cassis, Soda Water.

   (12) Picon-Cointreau.
   I glass Picon, i glass Cointreau, Soda Water.

                                                    75
        Cederlunds
      Genuine Caloric

            Punch

 rr

Th^
  l\|cipey^fhe femous

          "DoctorGDcktair

   Two-thirds Ce'derlund"s Punch. One-third Lime
   Juice.Ifdesireddrier,add moreLime juice.IfLime
   Juice not at hand, take Lemon Juice, add more
   Punch at discretion, thus increasing the sweet

   ness of the drink. Shake well; serve very cold.

          Sole Agents -for Cederltind's Swedish Punch:
   ROBERTSON BROS. & Co., 98Cre.lTower St, E.C.

                                   76
271. Wax Cocktail.

   I white of Fresh Egg, i teaspoonful of Gomme
Syrup, i Absinthe, J Gin.

   Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.
   {Recipe from Sherry's, New York.)

272. Waldorf Cocktail.

   I chunk of Pineapple, i teaspoonful Orange
Juice, J French Vermouth, J Italian Vermouth.

   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass.

273. West Indian Cocktail.

   I teaspoonful of Sugar in medium-sized tumbler,
4 dashes Angostura, i teaspoonful of Lemon Juice,
I glass of Gin, i lump of Ice.

   Stir, and serve in same glass.

274. White Lady Cocktail. ·
   J Brandy, J Crfeme de Menthe, J Cointreau.

    Shake well and strain.

275. Warday's Cocktail.

   I teaspoonful of Yellow Chartreuse, J Italian
Vermouth, J Gin, i Calvados or Apple Jack.

   Shake well, and strain.

276. Wedding Ball Cocktail.

   i Orange Juice, i Cherry Brandy, J Gin,

·}· Dubonnet.
   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass.

277. Washington Cocktail.
   2 dashes of Angostura, 2 dashes Gomme Syrup,

f French Vermouth, i Brandy.

                                                       77
278. Whisky Cocktail.
   I teaspoonful of Gomme Syrup, 3 dashes of

Angostura, i glass of Scotch or Rye Whisky.

279. Welcome Stranger Cocktail.

   J Grenadine, J Lemon Juice, J Orange Juice,
i G:n, J Swedish Punch, J Brandy.

   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass.

   (Invented by myself.)

280. Whisky Sour.

   Prepared the same way as Brandy Sour.

281. Whisky Smash.
   As Brandy Smash.

282. Whisky Daisy.
   As Brandy Daisy.

283. Whisky Flip.
   As Brandy Flip.

284. Whisky Crustas.
   As Brandy Crustas.

285. Whisky Julip.
   Same as Mint Julip.

286. Warden Cocktail.

   I teaspoonlul FrenchVermouth, i glassof Gordon

Gin.

  Sha.lce well nnd strain into cocktail glass.

                                             78
'· 287. Xanthia Cocktail.

       J Cherry Brandy, J Yellow Chartreuse, J Gin.
       Shake well and strain into cocktail glass.

     288. Xeres Cocktail.

        I dash of Orange Bitters, i dash of Peach Bitters,
    I dash of Gomme Syrup, i glass of Dry Sherry.

                                                                                                                                                 --·A

                                                                                                                                                                                                                             If

                                                            79
               RECIPES FOR CUPS.

   The following recipe is suitable for Claret Cup,
White Wine Cup, and Cider Cup.

   i an Orange cut in slices, i Lemon cut in slices,
2 or 3 Cherries, i Liqueur glass Dry Curacao, i
Liqueur glass Maraschino, i Liqueur glass Brandy,
I bottle Lemonade, i bottle Claret, White Wine, or
Cider as the case may be.

                           CHAMPAGNE CUP.

   The above recipe is suitable for Cups made with
Champagne or other Sparkling Wines, with the

substitution of Soda or Perrier Water for Lemonade.

                             BURGUNDY CUP.

   I bottle full-bodied Burgundy (but not a Vintage
Wine), I Claret glass containing one-third each of
White Curagao, Brandy and Madeira (or old White
Rum), Peel of one Lemon sliced very fine, also a
lump of sugar rubbed on the rind to extract the
essential oil and a teaspoonful of the juice, small
piece of crushed Pineapple, i leaf of Bay or small
sprig of Scented Verbena, or i leaf of Scented
Geranium (as an alternative, but not so good two
small slices of Cucumber rind), 3 bottles of Soda to
be added just before serving, 4 bottles if a Summer
drink. Sugar to taste.

   Lump of Ice if desired, but it is not an improve
ment, except in hot weather.

        For Orange Brandy and Sloe Gin, see page 82.

                                                     80
289. Yale Cocktail.

   3 dashes Orange Bitters, i dash Angostura
Bitters, i glass of Gin.

   Shake well, strain into medium-sized wineglass,
add a squirt of syphon, lemon peel squeezed on

top.
290. Yokohama Cocktail.

    I dash of Absinthe, J Grenadine, J Vodka,
i Orange Juice, J Gin.

   Shake well, and strain into cocktail glass.

                                                         8i
    RECIPES FOR HOME-MADE ORANGE
               BRANDY, AND SLOE GIN.

                         Orange Brandy.
    Pour I gallon of the best French Brandy on the
rinds of i6 Seville oranges in a large pan, the rinds
pared very thin.
    3 pounds of sugar candy crushed fine. 2 Vanilla

 Pods.

   Let it remainfor three days stirring frequently.
Strain through a jelly bag and bottle.

                                       Sloe Gin.

   I gallon unsweetened Gin, i gallon ripe Sloes,
3lbs. Sugar Candy.

   Pick stalks off Sloes, and slightly bruise with a
silver fork, to be then put into a large stone jar.

   Crush Sugar and add.
   Shake once a day for 3 months, and take care jar
has an airtight cork. Put away for 2 years when

strain and bottle.

                        For Cups see page 80.

                                                  83
 291. Za Za Cocktail.

    2 dashes of Pepson Bitters, J Nicholson Gin,
 f Cinzano Italian Vermouth.

    Shake well, strain into cocktail glass, with a

 cherry.

    {Recipe by F. Newman, Paris.)

 292. Zazarac Cocktail.

    i Bacardi Rum, J Anisette (Marie Brisard),
i Syrup of Gomme, J Rye Whisky, i dash of
Angostura, i dash of Orange, 3 dashes of Absinthe.

    Shake well, and strain into small-sized tumbler,
and squeeze lemon peel on top.

Lingfield Liqueur

           This Liqueur is a home-made
            Orange Gin, made from the
           original recipe of the late
           Robert Fowler, E.sq., Clerk
          of the Course, Lingfield

             Obtainable from

CHRISTOPHER & CO., LTD.

                                             83
O^TanQ'itlatniff

Zane Cocktail.

   In a shaker with crushed Ice, 4 daslies Angostura'
5 dashes Grand Marnier, 2 dashes Lemon Juice, i
liqueur glass Brandy, shake and strain in cocktail
glass, lemon zest, squeeze and serve with short straw.

Mexican Grog.

   In a grog glass, 2 teaspoonfuls powdered Sugar,
I liqueur glass Rum, half liqueur glass Brandy, half

liqueur glass Grand Marnier, fill with infusion of

boiling Tea, and serve with one slice of Lemon
pricked with a Clove.

Brandy Gobbler.
    Shaker with Ice, 2 teaspoonfuls Powdered Sugar,

3 dashes Grand Marnier, 3 dashes Noyau, i wine
glass of Brandy, .stir, strain in medium size goblet,
garnish with slices of Orange and Lemon, cut fruit,
add a few drops of Red Port over, and serve with

 straws.

Fancy Whisky Cocktail.

    In shaker with crushed Ice, 3 teaspoonfuls of
Sirop of Sugar, 2 of Maraschino, 2 dashes of Angos
tura, I dash Grand Marnier, i glassful of Scotch
Whisky, shake and strain in a cocktail glass with
frosted brim, add a Cherry cooked in Sirop, zest of
squeezed Lemon, and serve with short straws.

 Grand Marnier Cocktail.

    In shaker with crushed Ice, i teaspoonful of

                                             84
Anisette, i dash Angostura, f of a wine glass of

Grand Marnier.

   Shake and strain in cocktail glass with frosted
rim, add zest of squeezed lemon and serve with

short straws.

Knickerbocker.

   Shaker with crushed Ice, the juice of i a lemon
with zest, I tablespoonful of Sirop Framboise, 4
dashes Grand Marnier, i glass of Rum.

   Shake and serve in medium size glass, fill with
frappe water and garnish with cut fruit and straws.

Locomotive.

    (Hot). Heat a glass of Red Wine in which is

added one liqueur glass Grand Marnier, and pour
out in grog glass containing the yolk of an egg well
beaten with 2 teaspoonfuls of honey.

    Stir and serve.

 Torrelli's CoUin.

   In a large goblet, i tablespoonful of powdered
Sugar, the juice of i a Lemon, and ^ an Orange,
1 liqueur glass of Grand Marnier, -J- a liqueur glass of
Gin, I- a liqueur glass of Maraschino, fill with syphon,

a few small pieces of Ice.

    Stir, and serve with straws.

Torrelli's Crusta.

   Prepare a claret glass with sugared rim, with a
knife take off rinf of an Grange so as to be able to
garnish the inside of the claret glass. Put a Straw
berry at the bottom, and pour over the following
mixture. In a shaker with crushed Ice, the juice
of a ;1- of a Lemon, ]-a teaspoonful of powdered Sugar,
2 dashes of Angostura, 4 dashes of Noyau, i tea-
spoonful of Maraschino, i liqueur glass of MTiite
Port, I liqueur glass Grand Marnier.

   Frappcr and strain in the glass prepared as above,

and serve with short straws.

G  85
Scotch Whisky

                 Christopher's
         " Four Lion " Brand

               Gv

                 Christopher's
 Finest Old "Whtte'' Scotch

                      Whisky

               G\^

The above Whiskies are of the

   finest quality procurable, and
        strongly recommended

                                                    ?6
Cognac Brandy

           CHRISTOPHER'S
           choice stock of old
            landed COGNA C
            BRANDIES are

         unique, and amongst

            the best in existence

PRICE LIST ON APPLICATION

                                               87
m. R. LOFTUS, Ltd.

     TRE NOTED HOUSE FOR
     COCKTAIL SHAKERS

ESTABLISHED NEARLY A CENTURY

                    THE ORIGINAL
                 PATTERN SHAKERS

                                      ·

                 BEWARE OF CHEAP
                       IMITATIONS

                                             ·

                 WE HOLD THE LARGEST
                    stock; in LONDON

                                            ·
                  SATISFACTION GUAHANTEED

                 ·

                 WHITE FOR FULL LIST

                 POST FREE

 Boston Pattern    ^£55^                        Standard Pattern
Cocktail Shaker  PRICES ;                        Cocktail Shaker

 Best E.P.N.S.                                    Best E.P.N.S.

STANDARD PATTERN, B.P.N.S., i-pint, 14/6; i-pint, 17/6;
1-pint, 21/-; Ij-pints, 33/9. N.P., 1-pint, 7/6 » I>-pjnIs, 9/-.
Heavier Quality N.P., 1-pint. 10/6; i i-pints, 11/6- Ahimimum.
l-pint, 3/6; 1-pint, 7/6. BOSTON PATTERN, E-P.N.S., 3-pint,

                        22/6; l-pint, 27/6; 11-pints, 36/-

ALL ACCESSORIES FOR THE ART OF
COCKTAIL MIXING ALWAYS IN STOCK

CHERRIES IN MARASCHINO & CREME DE MENTHE

                                     A SPECIALITY

Address: 18 TOTTENHAM COURT ROAD

                  (Oxford Street End), LONDON, W. I

Telephone: Museum 6236. TclcgTams . Improver!, Westcent, London
                             INDEX

ABSINTHeJCoCKTAIL                      PAGE 15
                                               15
          Frappe Cocktail                      15
                                               15
Adonis Cocktail
                                                 16
Alaska ,,
                                                16
Alexander ,,                                   15
                                                16
Alfonso ,,                                 - 15
                                               15
American Beauty

Angel's Kiss

Apple Jack Cocktail

Astoria              ,,

Bacardi Cocktail                    ;  18

Bamboo           ,,                    19

Bijou            ,,                    18

Blackthorn ,,                          17

Bloodhound Cocktail                    17
Bossom Caresser ,,                     17

Brandy                   ,,            18

         Crustas                       20

         Daisy                         19

         Fix                           20

         Flip                          19

         Highball                      20

         J ulip                        20

         Smash                         19

         Sour                          19

Brazil CocktaU                         17

Broken Spur Cocktail                   17

Bromo Seltzer                          20

Bronx Cocktail                         17

Bronx Terrace Cocktail                 18

Brooklyn                 ,,            17

                             89
Brut Cocktail                        page 18
                                             20
Bull Dog
                                           18
Bunny's Hug Cocktail'
                                            18
Byrrh
                                             21
Cafe de Paris Cocktail                      21
                                             21
Cameron's Kick ,,                 ;         21
                                             21
Canadian Cocktail
Carrol       ,,                            24

Casino       ,                              21
c.F.H.       ,,
                                           25
Champagne ,,                                23
                                           25
               Cup
                                             22
                Pick-me-up                  22
Chinese Cocktail
                                            25
Chocolate ,,
Chorus Lady ,,                               22

Cider Cup                                   22
                                            25
Cinzano Cocktail                             22
                                           23
              Champagne Cocktail
Claret Lemonade                                 24

Clover Club Cocktail                            23

         Leaf                                  24

Club                                            23

Coffee                                         23

Colonial                                   2244
                                           25
Commodore                                  24

Cooperstown                                 80

Coronation                                 27
                                           27
Country Club Cooler                        27
Cream Fizz                                 27
Cuban Cocktail

Cups, Recipes for

Dacqueri Cocktail
Dempsey          ,,
Derby            ,,

Diabolo          ,,

                            90
Diki Diki Cocktail                page 28

Doctor ,,                                 28
Douglas ,,                               28

Dream       ,,                              27
                                           27
Du Barry ,,
                                          28
Dubonnet ,,                               28
                                          27
,,              Fizz
                                             29
Dunlop Cocktail
                                        ,29
Eagle's Dream Cocktail                     29
                                           3°
East India                ,,               3°

Egg Flip                               ' 3°

Egg Lemonade                                 29
Egg Nogg
                                   . . 3°
         ,, (Hot)
                                              29
Elk's Own Cocktail                           3°

Empire" Punch                              29

E. Nos Cocktail                              3'
                                             31
Eton Blazer                                 3'
                                             32
Eye-Opener Cocktail                           3'

Fairbank Cocktail                          3'
                                             3^
Fascinator       ,,                        3^

Fernet Branca ,,                             35
                                             33
Fish House Punch
                                          33
Flu Cocktail
                                             33
Fourth Degree Cocktail                       33
                                           34
Fox River                 ,,               34

Futurity                  ,,               35

Gangadine Cocktail

Gazette               ,,

Gilroy

Gimlet

Gin Cocktail

,, Daisy

,, Fix

,, Fizz

                              91
Gin Flip                                   page 34
  ,, Highball                                      35

.. Julip                                   34
,, Rickey                                  35

  ,, Sling . ;                             34
  ,, Smash                                 34
Gloom Raiser                               33

Golden Fizz                                34
     ,, Slipper
                                        ,  35

Greenbriar Cocktail                        33

Green Room Cocktail                        35
Grenadier                                  34

Guards'              ,,                    35

Hakam-Hiccup Cocktail                      37

Harry's Cocktail                           38
                                           38
Harry's Pick-me-up                         37
                                           37
Harvard Cocktail                           37
                                           37
Hasty            ,,                        37
                                           37
Hoffman House Cocktail                     38
                                           38
Homestead                    ,,

Hoola-Hoola                  ,,

Horse's Neck

Hot Egg Nogg                         ,

       Grog

Inca Cocktail                              40
                                           40
Ink Street ,,                              40

Irish        ,,

Jack Rose Cocktail                         41

Japanese                 ,,                41
                                           42
Jersey                   ,,                41

Jockey Club              ,,                42
John Collins                               41
J. O. S. Cocktail                          41
Journalist ,,                              41
Jupiter ,,

                                 92
Knickerbocker Cocktaii.                                               page 43
                                                                                43
Knock-out                 ,,

Lasky Cocktail                                                        45

Lawhill     ,,                                                        45
                                                                      45
Leave-it-to-me Cocktail                                               45
                                                                      45
Lemon Squash                                                          45
                                                                      45
Leroi Cocktail

Locomotive

Lone Tree Cocktail

Magnolia                                                              '... 49

Maiden's Blush Cocktail                                               47

Mamay Taylor                                                          49

Manhattan Cocktail                                                    ~. .. 47

Martini Cocktail                                                      47

,, Medium,,                                                     ...r  47

,, Sweet ,,                                                           47

May Blossom Fizz                                                      50
Mayfair Cocktail
                                                            '.        48

Milk Punch                                                            50

,, Shake                                                              5°

Millionaire Cocktail                                                  48

Mint Cocktail                                                         47

Mint Julip                                                            49

Mississippi Mule Cocktail                                             47

Modern                ,,                                              48

Moka Spitberg .·                                                      50

Monkey's Gland Cocklail                                               4®
                                                                      48
Montana               ,,

Morning               ,,                                              49

Morning Glory Fizz                                                    49

Mountain Cocktail                                                     4®

New Orleans Gin Fizz                                                  5^

Night-Cap                                                             51
Nineteen-Twenty Cocktail                                              5'
Nineteen-Twenty Pick-me-up                                            5^

                                                        93
Old-fashionep Whisky Cocktail .... page
Olivette                            ,,     53
Opera Cocktail                      .". . . . . . . . . . . . . 53
Orangeade                                  54
Orange Blossom                             53
Orange Squash                              54
Orgeat Lemonade                            st

.. Punch                                   53
Ostende Fizz                               54

Pall Mall Cocktail                         38

Pansy Blossom                              rr

Paradise Cocktail                          cc

Parisian                                   55
Pegu Club
                                           57
Perfect
                                           55
Peto
                                           55
Ping-Pong
Pink Lady                                  56

,, Rose                                    56

Planter's                                  55

Plaza                                      55

Polo                                       55

Porto Flip V                               !!!!!!!!!!!
Port Wine Cobbler                                           sy

Port Wine Cocktail                                            =6

Pousse Cafe                                                38

Prairie OL'yAsmteor uCrocktail          '  3387

Prestoman       ,,                                           eg
Princess Mary ,,
Princeton       ,,                      !!!!!!!!..!! 57
Pussyfoot ,,                                         | 35

                                        !!!!!.' ! 56

Quaker's Cocktail                          30
Quarter-Deck ,,                            30
Quartier Latin ,, '..                      39

                                94
t Queen's Cocktail              page 59
      Quelle Vie ,,                    59

Reform Cocktail                 Oi
Remsen Cooler
                                62
Rob Roy Cocktail
Rock and Rye                    61
                                62
Rose Cocktail
Royal                           61

   ,, Fizz                      . 61
   ,, Smile
Ruby Fizz                       62
Rum Crustas
   ,, Daisy                     61
   ,, Flip
                                .. . . 62
         Julip
   ,, Smash                     63
   ,, Sour
Russ House Cocktail             63

                             -  62

                                63
                                63

                                63

                                62

Saratoga Cocktail               65

Scotch Highball                 69
                                65
" 75 " Cocktail
                                66
" S.G."
                                69
Shandy Gafi                     68
                                67
Sherry Cobbler                  68

,, Cocktail                     65
                                65
         Flip                   66

' Side-Car Cocktail             66

Silver         ,,               b6
                                67
Silver Streak ,,                68
                                67
Sir Walter ,,        .... 1     67
                                "7
Sloeberry

Snowball ,,

Soda

Some Moth

So So

^ Soul Kiss

                     95
Southern Beauty                   page 69

South Side                                   68

Soyer au Champagne                        69
                                           66
Stanley Cocktail
                                            66
Star         ,,
                                         67
Stinger ,,
                                             68
Stone Fence
                                         67
Sunshine Cocktail
                                            68
Svvissess
                                         71
Tango Cocktail                           72
                                         72
Tantalus ,,                              72
                                         72
Texas Fizz                               71
Third Degree Cocktail                    72
                                         72
Thunder              ,,                  71
                                          71
Tipperary                                71
                                         71
Tom Collins
                                         73
Trilby Cocktail                         73
                                         73
Trinity ,,                               73

Tropical ,,                             77
Turf         ,,
                                          77
Tuxedo ,,
                                        78
Various Continental Beverages
                               ... 77
Vermouth Cocktail                        77
Vie en Rose ,,
Virgin           ,,                     77
                                        78
Waldorf Cocktail                        77

Warday's         ,,
Warden           ,,

Washington ,,
Wax              ,,
Wedding Ball Cocktail
Welcome Stranger Cocktail
West Indian Cocktail

                         96
Whisky Cocktail             page 78
            Crustas                   78

            Daisy                     78
            Flip                      78
             JuUp                      78
             Smash                     78

            Sour                       78
White Lady Cocktail                   77

Xanthia Cocktail            79

Xeres    ,,              '  79

Yale Cocktail
Yokohama ,,

Za Za Cocktail              83
                            83
Zazarac  ,,

                     97
r

           CHRISTOPHER'S

                        OLD

               LIQUEUR

        SCOTCH WHISKY

     

                          Guaranteed

                  pre-war quality
                    and strength

                                                          98
        France offers us the produce of her
                      choicest vineyards

GOLDEN GUINEA

                                              o

             THE FINEST
         SPARKLING WINE

             PROCURABLE

         LOOK'TOR THE GUINEA TRADE MARK.
        ITi IS THE HALL MARK OF QUALITY-
